j. michael bailey

joseph henry press
washington, d.c.

joseph henry press • 500 fifth street, n.w. • washington, d.c. 20001
the joseph henry press, an imprint of the national academies press, was created
with the goal of making books on science, technology, and health more widely available to professionals and the public. joseph henry was one of the early founders of the
national academy of sciences and a leader in early american science.
any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this volume are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the national academy
of sciences or its affiliated institutions.
the names of some of the people mentioned in this book—and selected details about
their lives—have been changed to protect the individuals’ identities.

library of congress cataloging-in-publication data
bailey, j. michael
the man who would be queen : the science of gender-bending and
transsexualism / j. michael bailey.
p. cm.
includes bibliographical references and index.
isbn 0-309-08418-0 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. gay men—united states—psychology—case studies. 2.
transsexuals—united states—psychology—case studies. 3.
homosexuality, male—psychological aspects. 4.
transsexualism—psychological aspects. 5. gender
identity—psychological aspects. 6. sexual orientation—psychological
aspects. 7. nature and nurture. i. title.
hq76.2.u5 b35 2003
305.38′9664—dc21
2002154181

isbn 0-309-08418-0
printed in the united states of america.



for drew/kate





contents

preface

ix

part i
the boy who would be princess

1

1 princess danny

3

2 growing pains

16

3 the boy who would not be a girl

39

part ii
the man he might become

55

4 gay femininity

61

5 gay masculinity

85

vii



contents

viii

6 danny’s uncle

103

7 is homosexuality a recent invention?

124

part iii
women who once were boys

139

8 terese and cher

145

9 men trapped in men’s bodies

157

10 in search of womanhood and men

177

autogynephilic and homosexual transsexuals:
how to tell them apart

192

11 becoming a woman

195

epilogue

213

further reading

215

index

221



preface

t

he most expert cosmetics salesperson at the upscale department store
in my neighborhood is a man. a female friend told me about him and, intrigued, i went to see him. he
was young, tall, and african american, and his head was shaven. his
fingernails were long and covered with clear nail polish. i watched
him as he helped a woman choose the right makeup. after he was
done with her, i introduced myself. he was slightly taken aback that i,
a psychologist, wanted to meet him, but he also appeared slightly flattered. he told me his name was edwin.
knowing his occupation and observing him briefly and superficially were sufficient, together, for me to guess confidently about aspects of edwin’s life that he never mentioned. i know what he was
like as a boy. i know what kind of person he is sexually attracted to. i
know what kinds of activities interest him and what kinds do not. i am
least sure what he will look like five years from now. based upon his

ix



x

the man who would be queen

current appearance, there is a chance he will undergo a dramatic
change.
although i am virtually certain that my conclusions are correct,
they fly in the face of mainstream academic opinion. if a current textbook discussed the basis of my intuitions—which many people share—
it would do so in the context of stereotypes. it would neglect to explain that my intuitions are probably correct, and it wouldn’t discuss
why. my book aims to do better.
*********
edwin is a feminine man, one of the most feminine men i have
ever met. any reasonable person who met him would agree with me,
unless that person’s only source of knowledge was a contemporary
social science textbook. the textbook would say that concepts like
“femininity” and “masculinity” are hopelessly muddled concepts that
have more to do with the observer than the observed. presumably its
author would disapprove of using the word “feminine.” it would be
amusing to hear such a person trying to describe edwin without it.
scientifically, we have begun a renaissance period for taking femininity and masculinity seriously. this is partly because of men like
edwin, and partly because of boys like edwin was. i do not ask edwin
about his childhood because i do not need to. i already know that
edwin played with dolls and loathed football, that his best friends
were girls. i know that he was often teased by other boys, who called
him “sissy.” i am fairly certain that his parents did not encourage his
feminine behavior, and if i had to bet, i’d say that his father was unhappy about it. the source of edwin’s femininity can be no obvious
social influence. it might be a more subtle social influence, or it might
be inborn.the fascinating question of what causes edwin’s femininity
can be asked only if we admit that femininity exists.
*********
although i didn’t ask him, i know that edwin likes to have sex



preface

xi

with men. not all gay men are like edwin, but almost all men like
edwin are gay. during the past twenty-five years, social scientists have
tried to discount or minimize the relation between male homosexuality and femininity. the standard lecture is that sexual orientation,
gender identity, and gender role behavior are separate, independent
psychological traits; a feminine man is as likely to be straight as gay.
but the standard lecture is wrong. it was written with good, but mistaken, intentions: to save gay men from the stigma of femininity. the
problem is that most gay men are feminine, or at least they are feminine in certain ways. a better solution is to disagree with those who
stigmatize male femininity. it is a false and shallow diversity that allows
only differences that cannot be observed.
to say that femininity and homosexuality are closely bound together in men may be politically incorrect, but it is factually correct,
and it has been known for a long time. the idea that some males are
“women’s souls in men’s bodies” was originally offered in 1868 to
explain gay men, not transsexuals (by karl ulrichs, who was describing men like himself). because the idea has been “off limits” among
scientists for several decades, there is a host of fascinating phenomena
well known to gay men and their friends that have barely been
touched by scientists: the gay voice, the gay gesture, and prejudice
against “femmes,” to name a few. scientifically demonstrating that
these phenomena exist has been easy. the next step will be to try to
understand why.
*********
there is some chance that if i ever see edwin again, his name and
appearance will be changed to those of a woman. even for a gay man,
edwin’s appearance and manner are exceedingly feminine. he would
stand out in a gay bar. (but he’d receive little romantic attention there.)
he is near the boundary of male and female, and someday he may
cross it. if he does, one primary motive will be lust.
the attempt to separate sexuality from gender has been especially



xii

the man who would be queen

misleading for transsexualism. supposedly, male-to-female transsexuals
are motivated solely by the deep-seated feeling that they have women’s
souls. furthermore, the fact that some transsexuals are sexually attracted to men and others to women allegedly means that sex has
nothing to do with it. however, in this case the exception proves the
rule. heterosexual men who want to be women are not naturally
feminine; there is no sense in which they have women’s souls. what
they do have is fascinating, but even they have rarely discussed it openly.
one cannot understand transsexualism without studying transsexuals’ sexuality. transsexuals lead remarkable sex lives. those who
love men become women to attract them. those who love women
become the women they love. although transsexuals are cultural hot
commodities right now, writers have been either too shallow or too
squeamish to give transsexual sexuality the attention it deserves. no
longer.
*********
this book deals with feminine males and completely ignores masculine females. that was not my original attention. butch women are
fascinating too, and i have studied them. there are many analogies
between very masculine women and very feminine men, but there are
also important differences. butch women are not simply the opposite
of femme men. rather than attempting to force them together, i decided to focus on males. masculine females deserve their own book.
*********
completing this book required substantial assistance from many
other people. several scientists and scholars spent a good deal of their
time discussing ideas with me: ray blanchard, khytam dawood, anne
lawrence, simon levay, rictor norton, maxine petersen, bill reiner,
and ken zucker. anjelica kieltyka introduced me to the chicago
transsexual community and taught me a great deal by being honest
and open. my colleague, joan linsenmeier, read the entire manuscript



preface

xiii

and made sure that my thoughts were clear. my editor, jeff robbins,
at joseph henry press, made my writing better than i could. i am
grateful to daria cooper for her support while finishing the book.
finally, i would never have thought of this book without leslie ryan
and cher mondavi, both courageous women, in their own, different,
ways.









part i
the boy who would
be princess





chapter

1

princess danny

i

t started with the shoes. after danny
ryan became a proficient walker,
not much more than a year old, he
ventured into his mom’s closet. he came out with a pair of strappy
heels and struggled to put them on. bemused, she helped him, and
when he stood up in them, grasping her hand, he bounced with joy.
this became something of a preoccupation for danny. often when he
came into the bedroom, he went right for the closet. when it was
closed, he pressed up against the door and whined.when she indulged
him, he would pick out a pair of shoes, preferring the more feminine
styles. one day, danny came into the room with a sheet over his head
and ran straight for the closet. he seemed more eager than usual to try
on her shoes, and when he stood up in them and spread his arms, she
was startled to realize, at last, the meaning of the sheet. it represented a
dress. danny was trying to dress like a girl.
although leslie ryan felt intellectually satisfied with that simple

3



4

the man who would be queen

explanation of danny’s behavior, she began to feel uneasy too. when
she contemplated the reasons for her concern, she realized guiltily
that she was falling prey to the same attitudes held by the bullies she
loathed in junior high. it is surely common and harmless for children
to explore the clothes and activities that society had assigned to the
other sex. why shouldn’t they? still, she found herself hesitating when
danny asked for help putting on her shoes. she encouraged alternative activities, such as reading or assembling puzzles or playing with
the toys he was given.this tactic worked for a while, but invariably, he
returned to the closet. she decided that she would neither encourage
nor discourage his cross-dressing, as she had begun to call it.
however, when danny’s father, patrick, first saw danny in high
heels clutching a purse, he did not share leslie’s tolerant attitude. he
raised his voice: “danny, get out of those shoes!” danny liked neither
his father’s tone nor his message and, after a moment of stunned silence,
began to cry. leslie shot her husband a scathing glance and immediately picked danny up to soothe him. later, danny’s parents had a
heated discussion. danny’s father said that it made him feel “creepy” to
see danny dressed as a female and thought that allowing him to do so
set the wrong example. patrick believed that parents are an important
influence on whether a child becomes homosexual or heterosexual,
and he wanted a heterosexual son. leslie insisted that trying on female
clothing at age 18 months could not make danny a gay man, that
children like to pretend to be lots of things, and that patrick should
just relax. she dared not tell him how often danny was cross-dressing.
patrick’s consulting job kept him on the road nearly five days a week,
and when he was home, he was not the most attentive father. leslie
hoped that danny’s fascination with women’s clothes would pass
before his father had a chance to see it again. and for a while this
seemed possible.
by age two, danny had begun to follow his mother everywhere as
she went about her daily routine, from cooking in the kitchen to
dusting the living room, to talking on the phone to peeing in the



princess danny

5

bathroom. when she tried to get some time alone by turning on one
of danny’s favorite videos (the little mermaid was his absolute favorite), danny insisted that she watch with him. when other adults were
around, danny was particularly clingy. once a friend brought over her
rambunctious three-year-old son, and danny was terrified of him.
when the two boys were left alone together, danny began calling
“mommy! mommy!,” ran to her, and buried his head between her
legs. his mother did not remember danny’s older sister, mary (now
six and in school), being so afraid of being separated from her.
when danny was about two and a half, he discovered his sister’s
room, with its dolls, dress-up clothes, pretend make-up kits, and especially, the tutu that she had long outgrown and that was only a bit too
large on him. mary rapidly lost patience with danny’s intrusions into
her room and his fascination with her feminine things. she did not
share her mother’s reluctance to judge danny’s girlish behavior: “no
danny! dresses are for girls. you are a boy.” these altercations left
danny weeping in frustration and mary furious, and so their parents
framed the controversy in terms of territory and forbade danny to
enter mary’s room without permission. as a concession to danny, his
mother bought him his own barbie doll and gingerly took his side
when mary criticized his feminine choices: “danny can play with
dolls if he wants to, as long as he stays away from yours. everybody’s
different.”
during the year after danny’s third birthday, his mother hired a
regular babysitter for the afternoons in order to take an art history
class. the sitter, jennifer, was an attractive college student, a sorority
girl who loved both children and fashion, and both danny and mary
quickly idolized her. leslie briefed her on danny’s unique behavior
and reassured her that it was okay to indulge him. soon jennifer (at
danny’s urging) was painting danny’s fingernails and letting him wear
her bracelet. she introduced him to barbie online, a website where
they could dress up barbie in an assortment of outfits.they also played
“princess danielle,” with danny the princess and jennifer the prince,



6

the man who would be queen

wizard, king, or whatever male role the drama at hand required. alternatively, they would produce sequels to aladdin (with danny playing
the role of jasmine), or beauty and the beast (with danny playing belle),
or the latest video fascination with a beautiful female protagonist. jennifer was amused to think that she had found a playmate so feminine
that even she was relegated to the male role—and that this playmate
was a boy.
it was about this time that danny’s parents had their second
“danny crisis.” patrick found danny playing with his barbie while
wearing his sister’s tutu, and furiously snatched the doll away. then he
picked up danny, who was frightened, and carried him to the living
room, where he accused danny’s mother “look what your son is
doing!” as she looked at their faces—danny’s ashen with fear and her
husband’s red with rage—leslie felt her heart sink. she reached out
for danny, who practically leapt to her from his father and immediately began to cry loudly. she took him to his room and laid him on
his bed, told him that she loved him and would be back in a little
while, and returned to the living room to face her husband. in the
ensuing discussion, she had to admit that danny was cross-dressing
regularly, but she thought that he was merely “going through a phase.”
she made her husband realize how devastated danny was by the scene,
and she saw his anger transform into guilty regret.
this was the last time they fought about danny. after that day, the
ryans seemed to work out a silent compromise, in which leslie tried
to keep danny’s feminine side from her husband, and he let danny
alone. danny helped, because he seemed to understand that his father
was not as receptive as his mother to his feminine activities. sometimes, despite their unspoken efforts, patrick saw something not intended for his eyes—for example, danny playing with barbie. although patrick no longer stopped danny or criticized him, these
moments were usually awkward and tense. danny would hesitate, as if
he thought he might get in trouble, until patrick left or looked away.
patrick would become cold and quiet, and leslie would become especially attentive to him. but no one spoke up about danny.



princess danny

7

during danny’s fourth year, he “came out” to his block, going
outside to play with the neighborhood kids, wearing or bringing whatever he wanted. unlike his sister, the younger kids did not give him a
hard time at first although some commented, “he’s wearing girl’s
clothes.” danny gravitated toward the girls, who accepted him as a
skilled participant in their activities, but he became visibly anxious
when boys started playing rough around him, as they typically did. as
the other boys began to shout, shoot each other with toy guns, and
collide with each other, danny shrank by the side of his guardian,
usually jennifer or his mother.
on his fourth birthday danny had a party attended by several
neighborhood kids and their mothers, his sister, jennifer, and his
mother. he wore his tutu, a bridal veil he had recently persuaded his
mother to buy him, and black patent leather shoes that his sister had
outgrown. jennifer did his nails and fixed his hair (with a bow), and
danny was radiant. his gifts included a baseball bat and glove and a
toy car (his mother and perhaps danny too wondered why anyone
would give these to him), some puzzles and books, a doll, a toy makeup kit, and, best of all, a charm bracelet from jennifer. leslie realized
that the other mothers probably saw danny as odd, but no one remarked about his outfit or the unusual gifts. danny was ecstatic. he
was on top of the world, happier than he would be for a long time.
*********
danny’s fifth year was a turning point, the year of unhappy awareness. this was the year that other children, his mother, and danny
himself began to realize that his behavior was not only unusual, but
also in some sense unacceptable. it was the year that danny learned
how cruelly our world can treat boys like him.
a new family with two older boys, ages 8 and 11, moved in down
the street. the first time the boys met danny, he was playing house
with several girls.they studied him with increasing amazement before
pronouncing him a “sissy” and a “fag,” and they laughed at him deri-



8

the man who would be queen

sively. stunned, danny ran home to his mother, who calmly explained
to him the meaning of these words. seeing the tears in his eyes as he
struggled with the “sissy” accusation—after all, he does like girls’
things—she was both furious at the boys and heartbroken for danny.
she realized that to that point, he had had an easy time with his
femininity and that even if she could still intervene with these particular boys, there would be others with whom she couldn’t. when she
defined a “fag” to danny as “a boy who loves other boys,” danny
protested, “but i don’t even like boys!”
next time danny went to play at the house where the boys had
harassed him, his mother made sure she accompanied him. this prevented a repeat—the boys knew enough not to be mean to danny in
front of her—but it could not reverse serious damage to danny’s social situation. for one, she could not always be with him, and whenever danny was on his own and saw his detractors, they made sure to
tease him: “fag!” or “sissy!” or “danny’s gay!” or “danny’s a girl!”
(leslie thought it ironic that in other times and circumstances, the
latter accusation would have made danny happy.) even more disturbing was the response of the other children, who began to question
danny’s play preferences: “danny, you shouldn’t wear dresses.you’re a
boy.” occasionally, they rejected him outright: “you can’t play with
us.” a couple of the older girls often protected danny and scolded the
others for picking on him, but the damage had been done. even when
danny was allowed to play, there was now tension where before there
had been none. difference that had been ignored now mattered.
leslie seethed with anger at the two boys who had spoiled danny’s
world. she made an indignant phone call to their mother, who apologized, but nothing changed. she had violent fantasies of intimidating
them into stopping. but she simultaneously realized that sooner or
later danny was destined to confront intolerance. even if those boys
had never clouded danny’s life, someone would have. events soon
proved her right.
although danny strongly preferred the company of girls, he had



princess danny

9

befriended one boy. martin was not feminine like danny, but he was
on the quiet side, somewhat passive, and not rough. he didn’t mind
taking orders from danny or playing the roles that danny cast him in,
which were, after all, invariably male roles. danny’s parents were
pleased that he had found a male friend. once martin spent the night,
and danny spent several hours at martin’s one day the next week.
soon danny asked his mother if he could have martin over again.
leslie called martin’s parents to arrange something, and martin’s
mother sounded strange as she said,“you need to talk to martin’s dad.”
martin’s father stammered a bit but otherwise sounded forceful as he
explained: “we have a problem with the way that danny plays. last
time he was here, he wanted to be the wife and he got martin to play
the husband.we don’t think that’s something our son should be a part
of. so for now, i don’t think that martin and danny should play together.” she couldn’t bear to tell danny the truth and so told him that
martin was sick. when she told danny’s father later, she broke down
sobbing to think of her son, four and a half years old, banned from his
best friend’s company.
it was becoming increasingly clear to leslie that she would have
to take a more active role in helping danny negotiate his increasingly
difficult world. she had never liked the idea of squashing danny’s
feminine interests. rather, she decided to help him become aware of
the potential consequences of his choices. the outstanding issue, she
decided, was cross-dressing in public. and so the next time danny
wanted to go outside wearing his tutu, his mother stopped him, “i
don’t think you should wear that, danny.”
“why?”
“because if you do, the other kids might be mean to you.”
“but i want to.”
“i don’t think you should.”
“why?”
“i just told you. if you want to wear that, fine, but only in here. if
you want to go outside, i want you to change into jeans.”



10

the man who would be queen

by this time, danny was crying and ran into his room slamming
the door after him. she knew that she had hurt him, but what choice
did she have? could a four and a half-year-old boy reconcile the fact
that there is nothing wrong with his strongest preferences with the
conflicting fact that he must nevertheless hide them from most of the
world? could she reconcile these facts in her own mind?
halloween approached, and she dreaded the unavoidable confrontation. when leslie took her children to the store to get costumes,
mary chose jasmine (from aladdin). initially, danny tried to choose
the same costume, but his mother said no. danny thought her refusal
meant that he should choose a different costume from his sister’s. but
when he selected a princess costume, his mother said, “i don’t think
that’s best, honey,” and suggested a cowboy costume. disappointment
flashed in his face, followed by shame.they eventually resolved that he
would be a magician with top hat and cape and wand, but she had no
illusions that this was danny’s first choice.
danny asked for a bicycle for his fifth birthday, and they went to
pick one out. danny immediately chose a pink bike with streamers,
and with barbie painted on it. his mother said that this was probably
not the best choice and tried to steer him toward a plain bike in blue
or red or green. this time, however, danny was in no mood to compromise. in the end, he chose not to get a bike at all rather than get
one he did not want.
*********
leslie became increasingly sad and worried about danny and believed she was depressed. she decided to go to a psychiatrist who
described himself as “psychodynamically oriented” and she told him
all about danny. the psychiatrist also wanted to know about her
marriage, her own family, and her childhood. he seemed to focus on
the period around the time when danny was born, a period she had
tried to forget. she had become depressed about her job. she found
accounting unrewarding, but she had invested so much time and effort



princess danny

11

in taking courses and passing exams to be an accountant. would she
have to abandon her career goals to become a housewife? for the first
year or so after danny was born, she had been unenergetic and was
not the attentive mother she should have been to either child. gradually, she had accepted that being a homemaker to young children is a
valuable job in itself, and that abandoning a career in accounting hardly
made her a failure. her energy returned, and she became a better
mother to her children.
after a couple of months, the psychiatrist told her that he had
reached an understanding of her case. he explained that danny’s feminine behavior was a direct consequence of her being unavailable to
him during his first year—that because she was an absent mother,
danny had reconstructed a substitute woman in himself. although he
did not say so outright, it was clear that the psychiatrist believed that
danny’s atypical behavior was all her fault. his primary recommendation was that she continue in psychotherapy with him, perhaps increasing to two visits a week. this feedback provoked a mixture of
feelings in her. she had always felt guilty about her maternal behavior
during this time and was now being confronted with the likelihood
that, indeed, she had harmed her child. at the same time, something
about the psychiatrist’s formulation seemed a bit of a stretch to her.
can children really resort to such complicated solutions to their conflicts? at one year of age? and how is her psychotherapy going to help
danny cope with the intolerant reactions of other people?
she sought a school psychologist for a second opinion, thinking
that a school psychologist had probably encountered boys like danny
and would have practical advice, especially because danny was about
to start kindergarten. she told their story to the school psychologist,
who wrote a report.when the psychologist summarized the report to
leslie, she seemed more harshly judgmental than she had been during
the interview. giving danny barbies and letting him cross-dress were
“inappropriate parenting behavior,” she said. danny’s parents had been
“neither willing nor able to set reasonable limits” on his feminine



12

the man who would be queen

strivings, the report continued.the psychologist advised that if immediate steps were not taken, danny faced social ostracism and would
probably develop “a homosexual preference.” although this was certainly not the first time leslie had considered his future sexual orientation, it was the first time that someone else had mentioned the issue
so directly. she did not like the way the psychologist seemed to assume
that homosexuality would be a bad outcome. in her own mind, the
issue was more complicated—she wanted danny to be happy, and if
he could be both happy and gay, she would love and accept him all the
same. and compared with danny’s current predicament, homosexuality seemed a minor consideration. by the time the school psychologist
finished presenting her report, leslie was in tears. noticing this, the
psychologist said: “i understand that this is difficult for you to hear, but
we both want what is best for danny.”
around this time, leslie learned something about her family that
she felt must be relevant. her 40-year-old brother, mark, called to say
that he was divorcing his wife because he was gay. mark said that he
had recognized homosexual feelings in himself from childhood and
had had sex with men beginning in adolescence and even through his
marriage. but he had felt “catholic guilt” and tried, at least intermittently, to suppress his gay feelings. after falling in love with a man,
mark realized that he could never be happy unless he followed his
heart, and this required self-acceptance. leslie was stunned by his revelation but managed to reassure her brother that it would not hurt
their relationship. later, discussing this with her own mother, she made
a connection. she asked her mother whether mark had been a feminine boy. her mother, who knew about danny, revealed that, indeed,
he had been. when mark was very young, he liked dolls and even
cross-dressed a couple of times. their father had disliked these behaviors and wouldn’t allow them. he had worried that mark was becoming a sissy and made him play sports, which mark detested. she hadn’t
mentioned this before because mark seemed ashamed to be reminded
of his feminine past, and so she didn’t want to bring it up. she had



princess danny

13

always assumed that because mark “outgrew” this behavior, danny
would also. leslie could not believe that the similarity between danny
and mark was merely a coincidence, but if not, what did it mean? was
there something about their family that produced feminine boys? a
gene perhaps? would danny become a gay man, like mark?
*********
kindergarten started off well enough. leslie met with danny’s
teacher a week before school began. she said that danny was “special,”
and then explained how. the teacher insisted that she would not
permit other children to give danny a hard time, and her attitude was
confident and reassuring.
leslie also talked to danny, in order to prepare him. as delicately
as she could, she suggested that danny not talk to the other children
about “girl stuff ” for the time being, that danny shouldn’t bring dolls
or girls’ toys to school. she took danny to nordstrom to pick out
clothes for the first day of school. with her guidance, they selected a
red ralph lauren polo shirt (with the polo logo), navy khakis (pleated
and cuffed), and black tasseled loafers. danny looked proud when the
salesman said,“you’re going to be the best dressed boy in your school.”
they had a bit of a conflict about danny’s lunchbox. he went straight
for a lavender aladdin and jasmine number, but she sadly refused. she
saw a blue one, featuring aladdin and the genie, and danny objected,
disappointed that there was no jasmine. they settled, eventually, on a
red aladdin version, sans jasmine.
leslie had been dreading the moment when she dropped danny
off at class the first time. he had always been unusually attached to her,
and this separation would be for several hours in a new, potentially
scary, environment. they had discussed various scenarios that concerned him: what if he got sick at school, what if she forgot to pick
him up, what if he got lost in the building. but at the moment of truth
in early september, danny gave her a quick hug, said “bye,” and
marched in. leslie watched for a moment, then turned on her heel
and rushed out of the room so that danny wouldn’t see her cry.



14

the man who would be queen

the first day was a short one, for orientation purposes, and three
hours later she anxiously re-entered the room and danny ran to her
smiling. she felt immensely relieved. maybe this could work. maybe it
was even good for danny. and for a while, it seemed so.
then one afternoon about a month later, leslie was called to pick
danny up from school early. he had had a problem during recess, and
he had been crying nonstop ever since. when she picked him up, he
fell into her arms, and he couldn’t stop sobbing long enough to explain what had happened. she took him home, and all he wanted to
do was sit in her lap quietly and watch television, periodically wailing
and crying, while she soothed him, quietly insisting that everything
was okay. eventually, he calmed down enough to tell her what had
happened.
he had been playing with some girl friends on the playground.
suddenly, a group of boys swooped in, shoved him to the ground, and
for good measure, a large one jumped on him, knocking the wind out
of him. leslie could imagine just how he felt, because she believed she
felt the same way: betrayed for no apparent reason, with no warning.
she wondered if this was some kind of random careless act or if they
had specifically targeted danny. she also wondered how danny’s behavior had registered with the other kids. his teacher had seemed
sympathetic but surprised at how danny had reacted.the next morning before dropping him off, she assured danny that he would be safe.
that afternoon, she learned that things had only gotten worse. at
recess three boys followed him around calling him “girlfriend,” “fairy,”
and “faggot,” until he latched onto the teacher and she scolded them.
leslie arranged to talk to the teacher, who said she was angry with
the offending boys and promised to protect danny. but she added:
“i’m concerned that danny is doing some things that make other kids
dislike him. he’s bossy and demanding. he tells the girls he plays with
what they have to do and say. he tattles. and when other kids tease
him, instead of ignoring them, he talks back to them in ways that egg
them on. the other day, someone called him a girl, and he said: ‘i’d



princess danny

15

rather be a girl than a stupid ugly boy.’ on the one hand, i admired his
chutzpah, but on the other hand, i knew that this would only make
things harder for him.” leslie’s hopes for danny’s easy adjustment to
kindergarten were destroyed.
danny no longer wanted to go to school, but his mother managed
to get him there anyway. she considered any uneventful day a good
day. whenever anything happened, it was usually bad. he had become
an outcast at school, and he also seemed to enjoy his life outside of
school less. she worried that he was depressed. when she raised the
possibility of taking danny to a therapist (“to talk to about things that
bother you”), he initially resisted. he assumed that the therapist would
want to talk only about his femininity, and he was ashamed and defensive. but his mother reassured him that he could talk about whatever
he wanted, and that she didn’t want to change him. he eventually
agreed to see a child psychologist, who in turn gave leslie the name of
a therapist she could see for the depression that she felt returning.
current events gave leslie one more concern. a teacher in one
of the wealthy suburbs made all the newspapers because he ended one
school year as a man and began the next as a woman. danny found
out—one of the kids at school told him that he should follow suit—
and was very interested. (“what happened to his penis? can she have
babies? is she pretty?”) transsexualism had always been in the back of
leslie’s mind, albeit distantly, but danny’s reaction made her more
anxious. even if she could handle danny becoming gay, the possibility
that he would get surgery to become a woman was not something she
could tolerate.



chapter

2

growing pains

i

n spring of 1996 leslie ryan came
to my northwestern university office to seek yet another opinion. jennifer, danny’s sitter, was a student in my human sexuality class and was
working in my laboratory on studies of sexual orientation. i had lectured in class and spoken in lab meetings about feminine boys, and
jennifer thought that i might be able to give leslie more definitive
answers than those she had obtained thus far. danny’s mother had
three general questions: most importantly, what is the best way to
raise feminine boys to be happy boys? for the sake of curiosity, where
do boys like danny come from? for the sake of both curiosity and
helping danny, what becomes of feminine boys? i could easily answer only one of her questions. i have a good idea what danny will be
like when he grows up.
*********

16



growing pains

17

leslie insisted to me that she would love danny no less if he grew
up to be gay. at the same time, she was curious whether he would, and
she also realistically thought that his life would be more difficult if he
were gay. and she knew that danny’s father desperately wanted danny
to grow into a heterosexual man.
many people believe that feminine boys become gay men. when
danny was only three, the ryans had discussed the possibility that he
might become gay. of course, the children who had tormented
danny—calling him “fag”—were already convinced that danny was
gay. that was undoubtedly why they wanted to torment him. most
people leslie has confided in have also broached the issue with her.
they seemed to be divided between two general opinions. some
people recognized that the belief that feminine boys become gay is a
stereotype and so rejected it the same way they rejected most stereotypes, which, they felt, are the product of unenlightened thinking.
others wondered if there might well be something to the idea—just
as many people speculate (most often in private) about the truth of
other stereotypes. social scientists have studied what becomes of boys
like danny, and it is the one question about the boys that they have
effectively answered, one area in which even responsible social scientists can give an answer that is more than a highfalutin’ way of saying “i
don’t know.”
several scientists have followed nearly 100 feminine boys from
childhood into early adulthood. because of their work, we can make
educated predictions regarding danny’s adult sexuality. most likely,
danny will become a gay man. it is also possible, although less likely,
that he will grow up to be heterosexual. the final possible outcome is
that danny will decide to become a woman, and in this case, he will
also be attracted to men.
the largest, most famous, and best study on this issue was conducted by richard green, then a psychiatrist at ucla. green began
with 66 feminine boys, mostly referred by therapists. he also recruited
a control group of 56 typically masculine boys. the boys’ average age



18

the man who would be queen

was about seven years old when green first saw them, although some
were as young as four and others were as old as twelve.
the feminine boys exhibited a variety of feminine behaviors:
• cross-dressing: nearly 70 percent did this frequently, compared to none of the boys in the control group.
• playing with dolls: more than 50 percent did this frequently,
compared to less than 5 percent of the control group.
• taking female roles in games such as playing house: nearly 60
percent took the female role, compared to none of the control group.
• relating better to girls rather than boys as peers: about 80
percent did so, compared to less than 5 percent of the control group.
• wishing to be girls: more than 80 percent stated such a wish
occasionally, compared to less than 10 percent of the control group.
• having below-average interest in rough-and-tumble play and
sports participation: nearly 80 percent had below-average interest,
compared to 20 percent of the control group.
these were clearly two very different groups of boys, and the
feminine group was on the extreme side. danny showed 5 of the 6
behaviors; he has never expressed outright the wish to be a girl.
the boys’ parents reported that their sons’ feminine behaviors
emerged quite early. for instance, more than half of them said that
cross-dressing had begun before age 3 and virtually all cross-dressing
began by age 6. parents varied considerably in their initial reactions to
the feminine behavior. some parents were horrified and intolerant.
others seemed to have found the behavior cute, at least at first. they
showed green photographs of their sons wearing high-heeled shoes
and dresses, and they admitted that they had bought their sons dolls.
mothers who remembered reacting more positively had sons who
were slightly more feminine at the time green first saw them. however, this effect was small, and one wonders how much mothers’
memories might be biased by their sons’ present behavior. leslie’s ini-



growing pains

19

tial reaction was neither positive nor negative. although emotionally
she was more concerned than delighted, her overt response to danny
was to tolerate his femininity, if not to encourage it.
green tried to stay in touch with the boys as they became teenagers and adults. at the final follow-up he collected data from about
two-thirds of the boys—it is practically impossible to maintain contact
with subjects in long-term studies such as green’s. on average, the
boys were 19 years old during their final interviews, the youngest
being 14 and the oldest 24.
the results of green’s study are among the clearest and the most
striking in all of developmental psychology. about 75 percent of the
young men who had been feminine boys said that they were attracted
to men, compared with only one young man who had been a typical,
masculine boy. the odds against these results being due to chance are
astronomical.
the other 25 percent of the young men who had begun as feminine boys denied attraction to men. green does not seem very skeptical about these denials, but i am. for one, the 25 percent who claimed
to be heterosexual were three years younger, on average, than the 75
percent who admitted attraction to men. coming out as gay to others,
or even to oneself, sometimes takes time, and it is likely that at least
some of the 25 percent who claimed to be heterosexual would eventually become gay men. green himself wrote of some subjects who
denied homosexuality at earlier ages and then admitted later that they
had not been completely honest. it is conceivable that every one of
the feminine boys grew up to be attracted to men. i am not arguing
strongly that this is true—we simply do not know.
at his final interview,todd, one of the young men from the feminine group, said he wanted to become a woman. nothing clearly distinguished todd’s childhood from that of the other feminine boys. his
parents reacted negatively to his femininity. his father, in particular,
was angry about it, sometimes telling todd to stop and sometimes
ignoring his cross-dressing and playing with dolls. at puberty, as todd



20

the man who would be queen

began to mature physically, he realized that he wanted to do so in the
female direction. he was somewhat small for his age. at age 17 he said
that he wished he had breasts and a vagina and, although he knew it
was impossible, wished he could give birth. he was attracted only to
men. at his final interview at age 18, he said that his mother had given
him a book about christine jorgensen, the first person ever to have a
sex change operation, and he had become obsessed with it.
we don’t know whether todd ever became a woman, but let’s
assume he did. it might seem that if only one of the feminine boys
grew up to be transsexual, then being a feminine boy is not very
strongly related to adult transsexualism. but transsexualism is a very
rare outcome; in western countries, only about 1 in 12,000 males
undergoes a sex change. even if todd was the only one, the rate of
transsexualism among the feminine boys was about 400 times higher
than we would expect in the general population. and conceivably
some of the feminine boys green lost touch with became transsexual—feminine boys who become transsexuals are often estranged
from their families and so are more difficult to contact. some other
scientists believe that green’s transsexualism rate was on the low side,
although no one believes that transsexualism is nearly as common an
outcome as homosexuality is.
*********
when i told leslie about the prospective data on boys like danny,
she said that she didn’t care that he will probably become gay, that she
only wanted him to be happy. i believed her, but in any case, her
attitude is sensible. there is no reason to believe that we could alter
danny’s future sexual orientation even if we tried. several boys in
green’s sample were treated for their feminine behavior, sometimes by
therapists who believed that homosexuality would be a bad outcome.
but the rate of homosexuality among the treated boys was no different than among the others.
still, she worried how she should act toward danny, what would



growing pains

21

help him have the happiest possible life. should she accept his feminine tendencies completely and indulge his atypical desires? should
she have bought him the barbie bike? or should she do the opposite,
firmly and consistently discourage the behavior that has led him to
ostracism? should she even discourage his private sex-atypical behavior—throw out his girls’ clothes, for example?
increasingly, leslie felt torn. when she tolerated danny’s girl-like
behavior, she did so uncomfortably, wondering whether she was being
overly tolerant. after all, children don’t get to do everything they want
to do. they don’t get to eat candy, stay up late, or stay home from
school whenever they want.was she failing danny by not setting firm
limits on behavior that was ultimately self-destructive? but when she
did set limits, she felt more than just discomfort. when she saw the
disappointment, anger, and shame in danny’s eyes, invariably followed
by tears, she felt heartbroken. at those moments she wanted to tell
him that she loved him just as he was, that he should do whatever
made him happy, that she would always protect him from the reactions
of others. but she knew this was impossible.
if she knew that in the long run danny’s happiness would be
maximized by the short-term misery of squashing his femininity, she
could do it. or if the opposite were true—that danny would be happiest if allowed to flourish in his own way, and that preventing this
would only damage him—her inner conflict would cease; if she only
knew what to do.
unfortunately for leslie, psychologists don’t always know what is
best, and we probably will not know for the foreseeable future. however, it is conceptually simple to design a scientific study to answer the
question. first, identify a group of boys like danny. next, randomly
assign them to be treated differently, with half the boys being indulged
and the other half discouraged in their femininity. follow them into
adolescence and on to adulthood, and see if they differ in their outcome. however, besides taking years to complete, such a study would
require that parents be indifferent to having their feminine boys



22

the man who would be queen

assigned to either of two radically different treatments, with the possibility of harm. (of course, parents’ actions may already be harming the
boys, but at least the parents themselves are choosing how to treat
them.) it would also require serious research funding, to pay therapists
and researchers, but the issue has become the kind of ideological battleground that funding agencies do not like to touch.
so i do not know what to tell danny’s mother about the best way
to treat danny. i can only tell her what several experts, who have
studied and treated boys like danny, recommend, and why. unfortunately, the experts disagree among themselves, some of them passionately so. indeed, the controversy concerning what to do about children like danny has become one of psychiatry’s hottest potatoes.
*********
according to the current diagnostic and statistical manual of the
american psychiatric association (dsm-iv-tr)—which represents a kind
of official list of mental disorders—danny has a mental illness: childhood gender identity disorder (or gid for short). “gender identity”
refers to the subjective internal feeling that one is male or female.
most of us rarely, if ever, think about our gender identities. but if we
imagined that others were treating us as the opposite sex—insisted
that we were the opposite sex—most could get an idea of the mental
anguish a child with gid may feel.
to be diagnosed with gid, a boy must meet four major criteria.
(these are similar criteria to those for gid girls, although obviously,
girls and boys with gid behave nearly oppositely.) first, he must behave in very feminine ways. second, he must show signs of being
unhappy as a boy. third, his life must be substantially and negatively
affected by his symptoms. fourth, his atypical behavior cannot be due
to a known medical syndrome that interferes with sexual differentiation, or the process of becoming male or female. (one example of this
would be kleinfelter’s syndrome, a condition in which boys are born
with an extra x chromosome.)



growing pains

23

the controversy focuses on the first two criteria, and particularly
on the second. so let’s look at them more closely. in order to meet
the first, behavioral, criterion a boy must show at least four of the
following:
• a repeatedly stated desire to be, or insistence that he is, a girl
• a preference for cross-dressing or simulating female attire
• strong and persistent preferences for female roles in makebelieve play or persistent fantasies of being female
• an intense desire to participate in stereotypically feminine
games and pastimes
• a strong preference for female playmates
the second major criterion concerns feelings, and in particular
gender dysphoria, or discomfort with one’s biological sex. children
are not very articulate about their feelings, and so we often infer their
feelings indirectly. the dsm gives a range of behaviors that can provide evidence of gender dysphoria. in boys, the most extreme forms
of gender dysphoria include the wish not to have a penis. but a boy
can also pass the gender dysphoria hurdle if he shows “aversion toward
rough-and-tumble play and rejection of stereotypically male toys,
games, and activities.”
regarding the behavioral criteria, danny has at least 4 of the 5
behaviors. (a few times when he was younger, he playfully insisted
that he was a girl. this doesn’t qualify as a “repeatedly stated insistence.”) regarding gender dysphoria, he has never complained about
his penis, but he certainly dislikes rough-and-tumble play and rejects
stereotypically male activities. danny is not even a close call, diagnostically speaking.
the current controversy in the mental health professions regarding what to do with boys like danny is strongly related to attitudes
toward the gid diagnosis. some experts think that it is obvious that
boys like danny have mental problems that need to be treated. in
contrast, an emerging group of mostly (but not entirely) gay thinkers



24

the man who would be queen

believe that the childhood gid diagnosis should not exist. they believe that the diagnosis does far more harm than good.the two groups
of experts would give very different recommendations to danny’s
mother.
leslie knows about gid, and she unhesitatingly rejects the idea
that danny is mentally ill. but that does not resolve her dilemma, nor
does it ease her mind. danny is not mentally ill because he is feminine,
but he is having problems and is too often unhappy, and she does not
know how to help him.
*********
one approach that some clinicians have taken to boys like danny
is socially conservative. its most visible advocate is george rekers,
who is a member of the ultra-conservative “leadership u,” a virtual
university on the web. rekers is an academic psychologist who held
positions at harvard and the university of california, los angeles,
before assuming his present position at the university of south carolina. he has published numerous academic articles and several books,
and at one point he was funded by the national institutes of health to
research the treatment of children with gid. yet there are disturbing
aspects of rekers’ work that are peculiarly unscientific, such as his
writings invoking religious arguments for the superiority of heterosexuality. his assertion that homosexuality is “an unfortunate perversion” was, even in 1982, certainly out of fashion in academia, which
tends to be socially liberal. rekers represents the right wing of gender
theorists and therapists.
rekers’ position seems to be essentially the same as that of the
national association for research and therapy of homosexuality
(narth): homosexuality is inferior sexuality; homosexual people
can sometimes be successfully changed into heterosexual people; homosexuality is the result of faulty learning and abnormal family dynamics, so the earlier the intervention the better; feminine boys are
sick and at risk for homosexuality; feminine behavior can be elimi-



growing pains

25

nated the way that many other undesirable behaviors can, by consistent application of reward and punishment.
rekers has published vivid case histories of some of his patients,
and perhaps the most interesting was known by the pseudonym
“kraig.” kraig was especially important because he was a member of
green’s long-term study (green named him “kyle”), and so we know
something about how kraig turned out.
kraig entered therapy when he was about five years old. both his
parents were quite worried about, and his father was in fact intolerant
of, kraig’s feminine behavior. at least once prior to therapy his father
spanked kraig for putting female clothes on his stuffed animals. kraig’s
therapy involved the application of behavior-modification principles
that are familiar to many psychologists, teachers, and parents. for example, kraig’s mother was trained to ignore him whenever he displayed feminine behavior.this was initially quite traumatic for both of
them. kraig screamed so loudly in the laboratory during one session
that he had to be removed by a laboratory assistant. kraig was also put
on a “token economy,” in which he was given different colored tokens
for masculine and feminine behavior. the blue tokens he earned for
masculine behavior could be exchanged for treats such as candy bars.
the red tokens he earned when he was “bad”—feminine—had bad
consequences ranging from loss of blue tokens to loss of television
time to the most effective punishment: being spanked by his father.
although training occurred in the laboratory, these techniques were
applied in all areas of kraig’s life, for example, including his choice of
male versus female playmates.
according to rekers, after 60 sessions kraig engaged exclusively
in male-typical behavior. rekers’ treatment team noticed, however,
that in the laboratory kraig seemed to be acting. he would approach
the table of toys and say something like “oh look at those girls’ toys.
yuck. i don’t want to play with those.where are the good boys’ toys?”
still, rekers convinced himself that kraig was a clear success. indeed,
two years after treatment ended, his mother was concerned that kraig



26

the man who would be queen

had become too rough and destructive. rekers advised her that this
problem also was treatable and was preferable to the excessive femininity that kraig initially displayed.
green saw kraig periodically between the ages of 5 and 18.when
kraig was 17, his mother was interviewed and said she was thankful
that he had had the therapy; that without it he would have doubtless
become homosexual or worse. unfortunately, however, the therapy
had not rescued kraig’s relationship with his father, which had only
gotten worse. (it seems that kraig never learned to enjoy hunting with
his father and preferred art and theater to sports.) at age 17 kraig was
telling a story similar to his mother’s, indicating his disgust with homosexuality and men who behaved in a feminine way. a year later,
however, kraig admitted that he not only had homosexual feelings but
that he had acted on them—with a complete stranger in a restroom in
a convention center. he felt in his mind that the experience was “unreal,” and shortly afterwards took an overdose of aspirin. (he survived.)
he believed that his parents would be disappointed and upset if they
found out that he was not heterosexual. in general, kraig appeared to
be ashamed and deeply conflicted about his homosexuality. but he no
longer enjoyed dressing or acting like a girl.
*********
opposite rekers on the gender political spectrum is a group of
increasingly vocal clinicians, writers, and theorists, who believe that
boys like danny are healthy victims of a sick society. they include
psychiatrists richard isay, ken corbett, and justin richardson, psychologist clinton anderson, scientist simon levay, and journalist
phyllis burke, author of gender shock. (all these individuals are homosexual, but this movement also includes some heterosexual supporters.) they argue that there is nothing inherently wrong with children
who behave like the opposite sex. most of these writers accept that
there is a strong correlation, in boys at least, between early sexatypicality and later homosexuality. (burke is an exception.) because



growing pains

27

homosexuality is normal and healthy, feminine pre-homosexual boys
should not be labeled sick any more than gay men should be. (this
argument is closely analogous to the one that rekers uses to generate
the conclusion that homosexuality is a form of mental illness.) the
problem that feminine boys face is that of an ignorant, intolerant society, a society that allows people to be cruel to them for no good
reason. treating a man or boy for “femininity” does more harm than
good.
isay, for example, says that virtually all the gay men he has seen in
his clinical practice had some feminine traits in boyhood, and a few of
them were sent by their parents for psychological treatment. according to isay, his gay patients who had been treated during childhood for
being prone to cry easily were now uncomfortable with emotional
expression.treated for excessive femininity, they now tried to distance
themselves from all things feminine, despite the fact that femininity is
part of “their nature.” the result can only be unhealthy inner conflict.
levay and burke both point to rekers’ patient, kraig, as a kind of
poster child of the harm that the gid notion produces. to them, the
primary results of kraig’s treatment were damage to his self-esteem
and the crippling of his ability to express his romantic and sexual
feelings toward men.
a recurring theme among the critics of the childhood gender
identity diagnosis is that it includes children who simply do not conform to stereotypes of the other sex, whether or not the children have
deeper gender identity problems. in other words, a boy who acts like a
girl but is happy being a boy could still earn a diagnosis of gid. although gender dysphoria is ostensibly a core component of the syndrome, in order to meet the criterion it is sufficient that a boy avoid
typical boys’ activities. this would make sense if boys who strongly
preferred acting like girls to acting like boys invariably did so because
they wanted to be girls and disliked being boys. they think that deep
inside, danny ryan wants to become a girl, whether or not he says so.
the critics of the childhood gender identity diagnosis believe that,



28

the man who would be queen

often, feminine boys just like to be feminine boys, and no more. similarly, most of these critics downplay any association between symptoms of childhood gid and later transsexualism. they do not believe
that the femininity of boys like danny implies a fundamental gender
dysphoria that typifies transsexual adults.they think that danny ryan
just likes to act like girls do, but that he would be content being a
feminine boy.
the anti-gid folks have a logically consistent treatment recommendation: no diagnosis, no treatment.they do not believe that danny
needs psychotherapy to help him become more masculine or satisfied
with being a boy. rather, they believe that most boys with gid—
even boys who declare that they are girls—will grow out of it on their
own. and they are uniformly horrified by the behavioral techniques
applied by rekers. to be sure, they do not think that boys with gid
have easy lives, and they do not believe the boys should be ignored.
rather, they want to change society so that feminine boys are treated
less badly. i initially was quite skeptical about this position, because it
seemed to smack of ideological grandstanding at the expense of feminine boys. who can really hope to change society? i once challenged
levay on this, and he told me about a teacher friend of his who had a
gid boy in class, and who helped the class come to terms with the
boy’s “odd behavior and appearance.” and he reminded me of how
dramatically some other societal beliefs had recently changed. so i
became less skeptical, if not yet convinced.
*********
ken zucker, head of the child and adolescent gender identity
clinic in toronto, has criticized the right-wing position on gid, and
he has recently clashed with the left-wing. therefore, and perhaps
because i find his position especially balanced, i consider him to be
the moderate. with his thick gray beard and his contemplative manner, zucker appears rabbinical. he has certainly acquired a talmudic
knowledge of the literature concerning childhood gid, about which



growing pains

29

he is the world’s leading expert. his book gender identity disorders in
children and adolescents is surely the most comprehensive text ever
written on this topic.to say that zucker is knowledgeable is an understatement. to say that he is obsessive about certain subjects, including
gid and sexual orientation, is only a slight overstatement. i have seen
zucker in academic action for a number of years. he has reviewed my
articles, for example, and now he is editor of the prestigious journal,
archives of sexual behavior, and decides whether articles should be published there. invariably, he has pointed out several mistakes in my papers, from omissions of prior research i had been unfamiliar with, to
punctuation mistakes in my reference list (!). for this reason, i tend to
give zucker the benefit of the doubt in certain respects. for example,
i do not think he is prone to make mistakes due to being uninformed
or rushing to decisions. this is not to say that he is always right.
so what is zucker’s position? first, he believes that the diagnosis
of childhood gid is useful and valid, and the diagnosis is not merely a
value judgment that boys who like girls’ activities (or girls who like
boys’ activities) are sick or wrong. this is due to his conviction that
children with gid suffer, and that the suffering is not only attributable to bullying by closed-minded peers and adults. second, zucker
thinks that kids with gid often need to be treated with psychotherapy, and that their families do as well. these beliefs obviously distinguish zucker’s opinion from that of the left—“leave masculine girls
and feminine boys alone”—crowd, but zucker also disagrees with the
right’s emphasis on preventing homosexuality. zucker does not consider this an important clinical goal, because he thinks that homosexual people can be as happy as heterosexual people, and regardless,
he doubts that therapy to prevent homosexuality works.
however, when i spoke to zucker about the current debate about
childhood gid, i came away with the impression that these days, he
feels besieged primarily on the left. he has had several recent exchanges in academic journals on the issue of gid, all with critics who
believe that the gid diagnosis is essentially gender repression; his



30

the man who would be queen

tone in some of these exchanges has seemed irritable. he has argued,
among other things, that the notion that a boy might be diagnosed
simply for liking dolls is completely wrong. all the children referred
to his clinic for gid have had significant cross-gender behavior.
more importantly, he has scoffed at the idea that children with
gid are unhappy only because they are socially ostracized. he remembers cases in which children were unhappy primarily because
they couldn’t become the other sex. for example, he recalls parents of
a boy with gid telling him: “every night before going to bed, he
prays to god to turn him into a girl.” another mother of a six-yearold boy with gid told zucker that the boy cried himself to sleep
every night, softly singing, “my dreams will never come true.” these
boys are unhappy because they aren’t girls, regardless of whether others call them “sissy.” zucker thinks that an important goal of treatment
is to help the children accept their birth sex and to avoid becoming
transsexual. his experience has convinced him that if a boy with gid
becomes an adolescent with gid, the chances that he will become an
adult with gid and seek a sex change are much higher. and he thinks
that the kind of therapy he practices helps reduce this risk.
zucker emphasizes a three-pronged treatment approach for boys
with gid. first, he thinks that family dynamics play a large role in
childhood gid—not necessarily in the origins of cross-gendered behavior, but in their persistence. it is the disordered and chaotic family,
according to zucker, that can’t get its act together to present a consistent and sensible reaction to the child, which would be something like
the following: “we love you, but you are a boy, not a girl. wishing to
be a girl will only make you unhappy in the long run, and pretending
to be a girl will only make your life around others harder.” so the first
prong of zucker’s approach is family therapy. whatever conflicts or
issues that parents have that prevent them from uniting to help their
child must be addressed.
the second prong is therapy for the boy, to help him adjust to the
idea that he cannot become a girl, and to help teach him how to



growing pains

31

minimize social ostracism. zucker does not teach boys how to walk in
a manly fashion, but he does give them feedback about the likely
consequences of taking a doll to school.
the third prong is key. zucker says simply: “the barbies have to
go.” he has nothing against barbie dolls, of course. he means something more general. feminine toys and accoutrements—including
barbie dolls, girls’ shoes, dresses, purses, and princess gowns—are no
longer to be tolerated at home, much less bought for the child. zucker
believes that toleration and encouragement of feminine play and dress
prevents the child from accepting his maleness. common sense says
that a boy who wants to play with dolls so much that he is willing to
risk his father’s wrath and his peers’ scorn is unlikely to change his
behavior due to inconsistent feedback, sometimes forbidding, sometimes tolerating, and sometimes even encouraging it. inconsistent
parenting like this is ineffective in stamping out any kind of unwanted
behavior.
compared with the therapy of the right-wingers, zucker’s therapy
is more psychologically focused and less punitive. although zucker
encourages parents of gid boys to set limits on their sons’ feminine
activities, he also encourages parents to discuss their gender concerns
openly with their sons. still, there is no denying that both moderate
zucker and right-winger rekers think that parents should not just sit
back and let their sons express their feminine sides. this view draws
the wrath of the left-wingers, who insist that there is nothing wrong
with boys who like girls’ things. the central difference between
zucker and his critics on the left is that zucker believes that most
boys who play with girls’ things often enough to earn a diagnosis of
gid would become girls if they could. failure to intervene increases
the chances of transsexualism in adulthood, which zucker considers a
bad outcome. for one, sex change surgery is major and permanent,
and can have serious side effects. why put boys at risk for this when
they can become gay men happy to be men?
i have not heard anyone argue that transsexualism is an acceptable



32

the man who would be queen

outcome for feminine boys. this possibility is worth thinking about,
though, and in a moment i will. for now, let’s assume that we don’t
want boys to become girls and consider whether zucker’s methods
are necessary. one leftist, the scientist simon levay, has argued that
most boys with gid grow up as normal gay men without therapy, and
so the discouragement of femininity that zucker recommends is unnecessary and even cruel.
one bone of contention is the rate of untreated boys with gid
who would become transsexual. because richard green’s prospective
study is so famous, it is common for people to cite his transsexual
outcome rate of 2 percent (one boy out of fifty). however, a more
comprehensive review found a rate of 6 percent, and the authors
(zucker was one) believe that this may have been an underestimate.
transsexual adults are more likely than gay men to be estranged from
their families and unable to be found for a follow-up study. so maybe
transsexualism is a more common outcome than some people believe.
recent experience in the netherlands, where attitudes towards
transsexualism are quite liberal, also suggests this. peggy cohenkettenis, a psychologist at the gender clinic for children and adolescents at the university medical center in utrecht, recently reported
that 23 percent of the clinic’s adolescent patients who had been evaluated for gender identity problems as children went on to request sex
reassignment when they became eligible to do so at age 12.
still, most boys who want to be girls become men who don’t
want to be women. in the zucker-levay exchange, levay didn’t say
how he thinks this happens. but he did imply that it is unnecessary to
try to make boys with gid more like other boys. somehow, perhaps
through psychological maturity alone, they will lose their desire to be
girls and their unhappiness to be boys. the problem with this analysis
is that it ignores what happens in the lives of these boys, even those
who get no therapy. in contemporary america (and in every other
culture i know), very feminine boys simply cannot avoid encountering strong pressure to stop being feminine. boys who wear dresses or



growing pains

33

play openly with barbies are ostracized by at least some of their peers,
for example.this means that we can’t know how they would grow up
if we left them alone. boys with gid are not left alone.
imagine that we could create a world in which very feminine
boys were not persecuted by other children and their parents allowed
them to play however they wanted. do we really think that boys with
gid would have the same low rate of transsexual outcome that they
do in our crueler, less tolerant world? as much as i would like to
arrange such a world, i think that it might well come with the cost of
more transsexual adults.
maybe it would be worth it, though. it is conceivable to me that
transsexuals who avoided the trauma and shame of social ostracism
and parental criticism would be happier and better adjusted than the
gay men whose masculinity came at the expense of shame and disappointment. certainly their childhoods and adolescences would be. perhaps it would be more humane if we educated boys with gid early
on that if they wanted, they could eventually become women. if they
still wished to become women when puberty began, we could put
them on hormones to prevent their bodies from becoming very masculine, so that they would be more realistic and attractive women once
they made the change. at age 16, boys who had retained their crossgender wishes could opt for surgery. i can imagine that this world
would be more humane than ours, although we cannot know it without conducting an experiment that will probably never be possible.
in our world very feminine boys must contend with peers who
despise sissies, fathers who get squeamish seeing them pick up a doll,
parents who have a difficult enough time accepting that their sons will
be gay, much less that they might become women. for the most part,
people do not just keep these attitudes to themselves but convey them
to the boys. so even the boys with gid whose parents don’t bring
them to therapy are getting at least some therapeutic components.
they are getting a regimen of behavioral modification, heavy on punishment. compared with this, zucker’s therapy seems kinder and more



34

the man who would be queen

consistent, and thus more likely to be effective. zucker believes that it
is, although he is the first to acknowledge that no scientific studies
currently support the effectiveness of what he does. designing a study
that would decide whether his therapy works, over and above the
social influence that all feminine boys are guaranteed, is conceptually
simple: randomly assign boys with gid (along with their families)
either to receive zucker’s therapy or to receive no therapy at all. see if
those zucker treats are less likely to become transsexual. or see if the
boys zucker sees are happier in some other way.these are the types of
questions that danny’s mother most wanted to know the answers to
the day she came to my office. but i could not tell her, because no one
knows. furthermore, given the squeamishness of funding agencies
about these kinds of questions, i doubt that we will know the answer
for decades, if ever. which means that parents of very feminine boys
are sentenced to acting in ignorance, trusting their instincts, hoping
their decisions turn out for the best. although this is similar to the
situation of all parents much of the time, the stakes seem higher for the
gid boys.
*********
i am fairly certain that when he grows up, danny ryan will become a man rather than changing into a woman. i am more certain
that no matter what danny becomes, his sexual desires will be for
men. now eight years old, danny probably has not yet had clear sexual
desires. recall that at age five he claimed to dislike boys—he meant
that he didn’t like their personalities and activities, not that he disliked
them sexually. certainly at age five, danny had no unambiguous sexual
feelings. but he will.
we know very little about how children’s sexual feelings develop.
our society is very squeamish about children’s sexuality. i am not sure
that a study proposing to ask children about their sexual knowledge
and feelings could even be conducted in this country at the beginning
of the twenty-first century. this would be true especially of a study



growing pains

35

that aimed to ask about homosexuality. i cannot imagine congress
approving funding for such a project, and many parents wouldn’t let
their children participate.that is too bad, both for science and for boys
like danny.
try to remember how ignorant of sex you once were. well into
grade school, i had no idea what a vagina was (despite having two
sisters). i thought that intercourse involved the penis going into the
anus, or perhaps the navel, or perhaps that sperm crawled from the
penis into the woman while people slept—i believed all these things
at one time or another. i learned more accurate information gradually,
and mostly from peers and experience. but i could count on many
peers knowing more than i did, because they were nearly all heterosexual. and regardless of my knowledge of sexual anatomy, i knew
that men and women, and many boys and girls, had romantic relationships. i saw evidence for this everywhere: at school, on television,
in the movies. my friends and i talked about girls we liked (or pretended not to like).
i didn’t know about homosexuality until after grade school, perhaps just before high school, and i had very little idea what it involved.
looking back, i see now that a boy i sat next to and befriended during
high school french class was flaming, but i didn’t know that at the
time. i may have been a slow learner, but my point is that for straight
kids, only the graphic details are kept from them—and they have many
opportunities to learn these from friends. by comparison, gay kids
must feel like martians. until very recently, there were no openly gay
characters on television or in the movies. even today, when children
hear about homosexuality, it is usually in a derisive way. the gay
humorist, david sedaris, wrote about how important it was for gay
children to join straight kids in picking on anyone accused of being
gay, in order to direct attention away from themselves. although there
are probably some liberal communities where this would no longer
happen, there are many more where anti-gay sentiments are virulent.



36

the man who would be queen

many boys must simultaneously learn that they are gay and that they
are despised.
how will danny learn that he likes men? commonly, gay men
remember that they felt vaguely different from other children. this
difference doubtless has something to do with gender nonconformity,
but it probably also has to do with sexuality. even before i knew the
correct details about sex, i had crushes on girls. gay boys presumably
have crushes on other boys, and these crushes make them behave and
feel different from other boys. most people recall that they had their
first sexual attraction at about age 10, or fifth grade.
a couple of years later genital arousal kicks in, so that boys cannot
easily hide their sexual preferences from themselves. their penises insist on being heard. this is sexual desire. even here, though, motivated
boys can fool themselves. a gay friend told me that he always fantasized about a man and a woman having sex, often with accompanying
pornography. he thought this meant he was straight. when he finally
admitted to himself that he was gay, he was able to see that he had
always been aroused by the men in the fantasies, not the women.
one’s first sexual experience is variable in timing, because it depends so much on circumstances. a gay adolescent in a small, conservative community might have no potential sexual outlet. if he is in a
large, urban setting, he almost certainly will. on average, gay men have
their first homosexual experience at about age 14.
very feminine gay boys tend to know they are gay earlier than
masculine gay boys do. they have been called “gay,” “fag,” “queer,”
“homo,” and so on, since before they knew the meanings of such
words. they are “outed” at an early, pre-sexual, age. when they start
having erections around attractive males during puberty, feminine boys
need only connect some close dots. in some ways, it might be easier
for feminine boys to accept their homosexuality. for example, they
do not have to worry about ruining their image. their image is
already gay.
they might also have sex earlier. this is partly because they are



growing pains

37

quicker to acknowledge their homosexual desire, but it might also be
because they are easier for other gay people to recognize. a gay male
must be careful about approaching other males sexually, but very feminine boys are a safer bet. i would wager that among the many highly
publicized cases of predatory men having sex with adolescent boys, a
non-trivial percentage of the boys were recognizably feminine. the
older men had reason to think that their advances would succeed.
early awareness of homosexuality is not necessarily beneficial. gay
men who were gender nonconforming boys and who came out early
are more likely to say that they contemplated or attempted suicide
than masculine gay men who came out later. we don’t know why, but
it seems likely to have something to do with the stigmatization of
gender nonconformity.
if any feminine boy is likely to have an easy time coming out, it is
danny ryan. his mother already knows he will probably be gay—i
told her—and she says that this won’t be a problem for her. she will
have to run some interference with her husband, who is much less
accepting of the possibility, but she has already learned to do that
regarding danny’s feminine behavior. it is odd for me to think that
many people would think that leslie ryan is shirking her maternal
duty by helping danny feel okay to be gay. i think he is blessed to
have her.
*********
leslie ryan says that danny is “going into the closet more.” she
doesn’t mean the literal closet where he used to seek her shoes. she
means that more and more, he is hiding his femininity. patrick has
taken to playing catch with danny, and danny apparently enjoys
spending this time with his father. but he is not very good at playing
catch, and his mother thinks he would rather be doing something else.
he will no longer talk willingly about his feminine ways. jennifer,
his old babysitter, recently visited him. she recalled playing barbie
with him, and danny said: “we don’t talk about those things any



38

the man who would be queen

more.” he seems ashamed to have others know or talk about his unusual behavior.
he continues to see a therapist, and his mother worries somewhat
less about him than she used to. she thinks he has accepted that he will
grow up to be a man, if a feminine man. she knows that there are
problems ahead too. if danny becomes a gay man, as seems likely, he
will encounter more intolerance. still, she thinks that at age eight,
danny has left his most difficult times behind him.



chapter

3

the boy who would
not be a girl

i

t is difficult to see a boy like danny
ryan without wondering why he
exists. he is so unusual, and there is
no obvious explanation.when mrs. ryan came to my office, her main
concern was danny’s well being, but even she expressed profound
curiosity about where danny’s femininity came from. of course, her
curiosity is tinged with the possibility of guilt. mothers are the first to
be accused of causing their children’s problems.
most people mrs. ryan has encountered have probably looked at
her first as the likely cause. american views on gender development
have been dominated for decades by the idea that differences between
boys and girls are rooted in socialization, and socialization begins at
home. if a boy thinks he is a girl, the parents must have done something wrong. this has been the commonest view of both scientists,
such as developmental psychologists, and laypeople.
the prevailing view is probably incorrect. danny’s atypical behav-

39



40

the man who would be queen

ior is best explained as the result of feelings that began within him and
persisted with little encouragement. recent dramatic scientific findings have suggested that we couldn’t socialize a boy to behave like
danny even if we tried.
*********
when she was six months pregnant, jessica johnson got news that
every expectant mother dreads: something was wrong with her baby.
it was not growing fast enough, and when the doctors did an ultrasound, they saw a “mass” on the baby’s stomach.they told her that the
baby’s intestines were at least partially outside its body; but when it
was born, this problem could be surgically repaired. although the consulting surgeon knew jessica was worried, he reassured her that soon
after the baby was born, it would be all over, and she would “never
look back.”
mrs. johnson saw the surgeon again soon after the baby was delivered by cesarean section. he had lost his reassuring demeanor and told
her grimly: “your son’s problems are much worse than we expected.
he has a very rare and serious problem, called ‘cloacal exstrophy.’ his
bowels are poorly formed and open into his bladder. he needs surgery
right now. if they survive, kids like this will need several major surgeries during childhood.”
“if they survive?” mrs. johnson said to herself, but before she
could ask him about this, the surgeon added: “there is something else
you need to know. boys with this condition are born with poorly
formed penises, and in order to give them the best possible outcome
later in life, the standards of care are to surgically reassign them as girls.
this means that right away, you need to start thinking of your baby as
a girl.” he went on to explain that her baby would be castrated and
eventually would be given female hormones and have a surgically
constructed vagina. she looked at her husband, who seemed dazed,
and she burst into tears.
when they talked privately later, they decided that they could live



the boy who would not be a girl

41

with changing the baby into a girl. they had been planning to call
him jason, but now they agreed to call her amanda. they would tell
no one, and because they had never known jason, they would not miss
him. although the sex reassignment had been shocking initially, it
seemed less important now, in the scheme of things. amanda had surgery to close her bladder and to correct several other severe problems
with her digestive tract. an ileostomy was created, in order for waste
to drain. the testes were removed. during the first week, the doctors
became more optimistic that amanda would live.
her mother tried to find out as much as she could about cloacal
exstrophy, its causes and its prognosis. it is very rare, occurring once in
every 400,000 live births. the surgeon had seen only one other case.
no one knows what causes it. it isn’t hereditary, and so if mrs. johnson
has another child, it will almost certainly not have it. until the early
1970s babies born with cloacal exstrophy died shortly after birth.when
she learned this, mrs. johnson briefly wondered whether this would
have been a better outcome, but she banished this thought. children
with cloacal exstrophy spend a good part of their childhoods in the
hospital, having and recovering from surgeries. and if she and her
husband treated amanda like a normal girl, there was every reason to
expect her to become one.
they brought amanda home when she was a month old. she was
their first child, so they had nothing to compare her to, but she seemed
to be a happy, easy baby. aside from the countless trips to the doctor,
that is. mrs. johnson grew increasingly attached to her.
by age two amanda had begun to develop a strong personality.
she was assertive, loud, and active. when she played with her dolls
and cuddly toys, she did so in a very non-maternal way. she would
throw them, tear them apart, and carry them by their hair. she
enjoyed cartoons meant for boys. by age four, amanda had begun
to balk at being dressed in dresses or in anything pink. she played
more with the boys she met than with the girls. on her fourth
birthday she had a party, and the mother of one of amanda’s friends



42

the man who would be queen

said “i think that girl was meant to be a boy.” she meant it jokingly, but mr. and mrs. johnson glanced at each other knowingly.
later, for the first time, her husband raised the question that she
had not dared to speak: “do you think we did the right thing?”
during their discussion they agreed that amanda might be a tomboy, but she was a happy child. neither of them wished her to be
different than she was.
mrs. johnson brought up the subject of amanda’s behavior with
the surgeon the next time she saw him. he told her that it is common
for girls like amanda—that is, girls who were born boys—to have
tomboyish traits. “before she was born, amanda got a male dose of
testosterone, and this is going to have some effect on her brain.” but
he reassured her that girls like amanda appear to adjust fine as girls.
mrs. johnson wondered how certain he could be of this if he had only
seen one other patient with cloacal exstrophy, but she didn’t want to
appear difficult. the surgeon ended their meeting with the warning
that it was important that the parents “stick to the plan” of rearing
amanda unambiguously as a girl. “life is hard enough for her. you
don’t want to confuse her.”
when amanda entered school, she became even more masculine.
during recess she played with the boys, and she began to play sports.
she especially liked baseball and basketball. she was a good athlete, as
good as the better boys. with her short hair and masculine ways
of moving and talking, strangers often mistook her for a boy. her
classmates accepted and liked her, but they recognized that she was
different.
when she was seven years old, amanda’s parents began to worry
that it was wrong to hide the truth of her birth from her. they felt
guilty, and they also worried that when she became an adult she would
have access to her medical records and would discover the truth. they
worried that she would hate them for not telling her, or worse, that
she would not be able to cope with the discovery and would have a
breakdown.they decided to tell her.



the boy who would not be a girl

43

although it might seem to be a heavy load to drop on a child, this
was no ordinary seven year old. they reasoned that she was probably
already wondering why she was so different. besides, children younger
than amanda learn all kinds of things that others might find disturbing. mrs. johnson knew of young children who discovered that they
were adopted or who learned that their parents were criminals.
amanda was basically a happy kid, with two loving and supportive
parents, and she would be okay.
amanda’s parents told her that they had a “big secret” that they
thought she was finally old enough to know. she was, understandably,
intrigued. her mother spoke: “amanda, when you were born, you
were a boy. but the cloacal exstrophy had made it so that you didn’t
have a normal penis. so the doctors said that you had to become a girl.
they operated on you to make you a girl, and they told us that we
should raise you as one. i know that is a lot for you to take in, so i’m
going to stop and let you think and ask any questions you want.”
amanda sat, still, stunned, expressionless. as her mother and father
watched her, they ached inside. she asked: “if i was born a boy, then
why can’t i still be a boy?”they looked at each other, hesitatingly. she
said, more insistently: “i am still a boy.” her parents neither agreed nor
argued. she ran to her room.
her parents discussed what they would do. neither felt certain
what the best course of action was. both were suddenly feeling very
disenchanted with the strategy prescribed by amanda’s doctors, to
insist that she is a normal girl. before they could decide a course of
action, she emerged from her room and told them that she wanted a
boy’s name. mrs. johnson shrugged and said “when you were born,
we were going to call you jason.” amanda/jason said:“i like that name.”
it was july, and school was out, so mr. and mrs. johnson felt that
they had a bit of time to reach a resolution. their child was determined to stay a boy, and when they forgot and called her “amanda,”
she corrected them impatiently: “jason!” they were surprised at how
easily they stopped making that mistake. by august, they were firmly



44

the man who would be queen

on jason’s side. jason brought up the question of how they would let
his classmates and friends know about his change, and he decided that
they would tell everyone on the first day of school. they told his
teacher beforehand. (when they told her they had a serious issue to
discuss, she insisted that she had heard everything before. when they
told her, she changed her mind.) it was a small class, and parents were
told ahead of time that an important announcement would be made.
so the room was full of curious parents and children on the first day.
mr. johnson began: “many of you know that our child has always
seemed more like a boy than a girl. well, actually, amanda was born a
boy, and changed into a girl due to medical problems. but amanda has
decided to be a boy after all, and his new name is ‘jason.’ any questions?” the class sat in awkward silence until one parent said: “jason,
what’s your favorite sport?”
the children seemed to adjust quickly. it was as if people change
sex all the time. a few days later jason said, “the day i became a boy
was the happiest day of my life.” he has said that many times since. he
is the best player on his junior high school basketball team, and he has
a girlfriend. his parents say that it is difficult to imagine him as amanda.
they have no doubts that they did the right thing.
*********
suppose we wanted to do the perfect experiment to determine
whether the essence of boyhood and girlhood is inborn or learned,
the perfect nature-nurture study of gender. what would we do?
just after conception, male and female fetuses are quite similar.
what make them differ are the direct and indirect effects of testosterone, which is present in much higher levels in males. this is why, for
example, males develop penises and females clitorises. many scientists
believe that there are important brain differences between newborn
boys and girls that contribute to later behavioral differences. other
scientists believe that at birth the brains of boys and girls are essentially
identical, and that girls and boys behave differently entirely due to the
socialization they receive.



the boy who would not be a girl

45

so to the perfect experiment: first we would take normal newborn boys from their mothers. we would castrate the boys and surgically give the babies vaginas. next, we would give them away to unsuspecting parents, whom we would lead to believe were adopting
girls. we would watch the children to see how they develop.
what would we watch for? one obvious thing would be to see
whether the children behave more like boys or girls: whether they had
more stereotypically masculine or feminine interests; whether they
played rough; whether they had boys or girls as friends; whether they
liked wearing frills and having long hair or preferred pants and short
hair. the degree to which children behave like stereotypical boys or
girls is sometimes called gender role behavior. a second important outcome to assess, when the kids got old enough, would be sexual orientation. do the adolescent boys-changed-to-girls develop crushes on boys
or girls? we would also want to know whether the children were
satisfied being girls, or whether they would prefer returning to their
male state. this depends on gender identity, which we have already encountered.
unfortunately for scientific progress—but fortunately for those of
us who prefer humane societies—the definitive experiment can never
be performed. it can, however, be approximated, due to misfortune.
for example, science and the media have given a great deal of attention to two cases of boys who lost their penises in infancy and who
were reared as girls.
the first, more famous, case is that of david reimer. (before he
publicly revealed his name, the case was known as the john/joan case.)
as an eight-month-old baby, david lost his penis in a surgical accident.the prevailing scientific belief at the time was that children were
“psychosexually neutral at birth.” that is, both boys and girls could be
changed into the other sex, with the right upbringing and the right
surgery. however, it was, and still is, beyond surgeons’ abilities to construct penises that function acceptably. on the other hand, surgeons
have become expert at constructing vaginas. and so david’s parents
were given the choice of whether to raise him as a boy without a



46

the man who would be queen

penis or a girl with a functioning vagina. with medical advice, they
decided to raise david as a girl.this case was especially exotic because
reimer has an identical twin brother who was raised alongside david
as a normal boy.
early scientific reports asserted that this boy-turned-girl was functioning well as a slightly tomboyish girl. however, we know now that
david reimer experienced a great deal of inner and external torment
while being reared as a girl. other children called her “cavewoman,”
because she moved in such an ungraceful manner. she disliked the
feminine accoutrements forced on her by her mother. after receiving
estrogen therapy at age 12 she grew breasts, but this only contrasted
more with her hypermasculine appearance and made her feel more
freakish.when she was 14, she became completely fed up and stopped
trying to conform to a feminine stereotype. for example, she began to
urinate standing up. this caused great friction with her female high
school classmates, who stopped allowing her to use the girls’ bathroom. she also refused to cooperate with further medical efforts to
feminize her. one of the physicians involved advised her parents that
it was time to tell her about her past. when they did, she felt stunned,
but oddly justified: “suddenly it all made sense why i felt the way i
did. i wasn’t some sort of weirdo.” immediately, she decided to change
back into a male, and became david again. although he had some
difficulties adjusting (sexual relationships were initially embarrassing
and difficult), he never regretted his decision, and is currently married
to a woman.
the reimer case diverged from the perfect experiment in at least
one important respect. reimer lost his penis at age 8 months, and it
was not until he was 17 months old that the family decided to rear
him as a girl. although david does not remember anything from that
time, it is very likely that he had already begun learning, including
about his sex. perhaps he was simply too old to make the transition. a
second very similar case, with sex reassignment before age 6 months,
appears to have had a different outcome. in this case, the boy-who-



the boy who would not be a girl

47

became-a-girl has stayed that way. (on the other hand, she is a lesbian
with very masculine interests.) with just these two cases, the position
that gender identity, at least, is a matter of very early upbringing is
defensible.
cloacal exstrophy, jason johnson’s condition, is even closer to the
perfect experiment than surgical accidents. there are three main reasons. first, for 20 years or so, most boys born with cloacal exstrophy
were castrated and reassigned to girls within days after birth. second,
cloacal exstrophy is such a serious condition, with so many different
medical consequences, that parents are less likely to obsess about the
sex reassignment than they would be if that were the only problem a
child had to face. so it is less plausible that the parents of a cloacal boyto-girl would have a problem seeing and raising their child as a girl.
the third reason is that cloacal exstrophy, although very rare, is much
more common than accidents (penile ablation) that cause infant boys
to be reassigned as girls. there are only two cases of penile ablation
that are reasonably well documented in the scientific literature. although the results of these two cases are fascinating, they are too easily
dismissed as “just two cases.”
in contrast, one scientist has been studying boys born with cloacal
exstrophy who have (mostly) been reassigned as girls, and he has followed a number of them into childhood, and some beyond. his results
are likely to provoke a revolution in the science of gender identity.
*********
johns hopkins university in baltimore, maryland, is one of the
world’s greatest academic hospitals. this is where psychologist john
money did most of his work on the development of gender identity.
money was one of the most important scientists of the twentieth century, and his work on “pseudo-hermaphrodites”—people whose biological sex is neither clearly male nor clearly female—led him to believe in psychosexual neutrality at birth. money is the intellectual
father of reassigning boys with damaged penises as girls, provided it is



48

the man who would be queen

done early enough. in fact, money advised david reimer’s parents to
reassign him a girl. reimer’s anguish as a girl and return to the male
role, and the case’s publicity, have seriously damaged money’s reputation, but this does not diminish his importance in the history of the
science of sex and gender.
like money, william reiner is at hopkins.this is an ironic coincidence, because his work threatens to undermine money’s theory of
psychosexual neutrality at birth. reiner originally trained as a urologist, and for 12 years was a practicing surgeon. during this time he
gained experience reconstructing anomalous genitalia of children and
adolescents with conditions including cloacal exstrophy. he became
increasingly fascinated by the psychological development of these children, so much so that he retrained in psychiatry. says reiner: “i no
longer wished to ‘fix’ children’s genital abnormalities—i wanted to
find what makes them grow, mature, and figure out who they are,
regardless of their genital realities. and anyway, the pre-op and post-op
anxiety was killing me.” he began studying the psychosexual development of children with cloacal exstrophy in 1993. today he heads the
gender identity and psychosexual disorders clinic (child and adolescent) at johns hopkins. his style is direct and passionate, and along
with his groundbreaking scientific study, this has made him a controversial figure.
reiner recently submitted a major scientific article on the outcome of boys with cloacal exstrophy reassigned at birth as girls. most
of the children were teenagers (ages 14-20) at last follow-up. of 14
female-assigned children, 7 have declared that they are boys. five of
these 7 did this spontaneously. for example, one child refused at age
12 to begin estrogen therapy, saying “i am a boy.” in another case, the
child was hospitalized for depression before declaring that she was
male and wanted a penis. in the non-spontaneous cases, the change
occurred as it did with jason, after the parents came clean about the
child’s birth.
in two cases in which the children spontaneously declared they
were boys, the parents refused to acquiesce to the child’s wishes to



the boy who would not be a girl

49

change sex. these children remain girls to their parents, but maintain
male identities elsewhere. this will presumably change when they
grow up and assume complete control of their identities.
what about the children who maintain their female identities?
one had wished to become a boy but accepted her status as a girl.
later, her parents told her about her past, and she became angry and
withdrawn, refusing to discuss the matter. parents of the others are
determined that the girls will never find out about their birth status.
three have become withdrawn, and a fourth has no friends.
two other children that reiner has followed were reared as boys
because their parents refused sex reassignment. (not all parents had
this choice. one of the parents i spoke with was threatened with child
protective services if he refused to allow his child to be reassigned.)
both of these boys are happy, typically masculine boys, although one is
concerned about his sex life without a normal penis.
all reiner’s cases who have talked about sexual and romantic
feelings are attracted to females; however, several have not revealed
anything about these feelings. all cases have unfeminine interests and
behavior, and some are quite masculine. one who returned to the
male role has been arrested for assault.
what do we make of these results? just looking at the numbers—
7 of 14 reassigned children returning to the male role, 7 of 14 remaining female—one might be tempted to conclude that no generalization
is possible. but it is very rare for a girl to renounce her biological sex
in the insistent way that the first 7 did. the 50 percent rate so far
among reiner’s kids is extraordinarily high.
and even though half the children remain girls, what is our best
guess about their state of mind? do they represent successful adjustment to the female role? let’s assume that none of these children will
renounce her status as a female and that in adulthood all will consider
themselves women. does this mean that they have normal female gender identity? will they be happier as women with functioning vaginas
than they would be as men with non-functioning (or absent) penises?
in their pursuit of the perfect nature-nurture experiment, scien-



50

the man who would be queen

tists have thought too little about how to assess outcome. cleary, if a
male infant is reassigned as a girl and later declares that he is a boy, the
initial reassignment was a mistake. but if the child does not openly
renounce the female role, does this mean that the decision to reassign
to the female role was correct? for the most part, scientists such as
john money have acted as if this was a correct inference. but scientists
have not fully appreciated how complicated a trait gender identity
likely is, or how little we know about it. one expert told me, bluntly:
“gender identity is defined as ‘the inner sense of oneself as male or
female.’ what the hell does that mean?”
one under-appreciated complication is that gender identity is
probably not a binary, black-and-white characteristic. scientists continue to measure gender identity as “male” or “female,” despite the fact
that there are undoubtedly gradations in inner experience between
the girl who loves pink frilly dresses and cannot imagine becoming a
boy and the extremely masculine boy who shudders to think of becoming a girl.
a second complication is the translation of inner experience to
words. of course scientists recognize that sometimes people don’t reveal everything that is on their minds, and so a cloacal exstrophy child
might not openly admit the preference to become a boy. but how
would a girl even know if she had the same inner experience as a
typical boy? if she had been reared from birth as a girl and had no
notion that sometimes boys become girls and vice versa, would she
still have the conscious realization that she was a boy inside? i think
that the answer to this latter question is “quite possibly, no.” if i am
right, then scientists have been using a very biased definition of errors
in gender identity. the bias is toward missing mistakes.
the perfect nature-nurture experiment requires a better way of
measuring the outcome than merely waiting to see if a child spontaneously asks for a sex change.what we really want to know is whether
a particular child would be happier being reared as a male or as a
female. of course, no one can go back in time, and so we can’t get a



the boy who would not be a girl

51

complete replay of anyone’s life as both a male and a female. however,
reiner’s results all point to the superiority of male assignment for
cloacal exstrophy cases born male. this is obvious for those who
changed back to boys. i spoke to parents of three of these children, and
all said their children were much happier as boys than they had been as
girls. interestingly, only one of these parents said her child had seemed
unhappy as a girl. the other two characterized their children as basically happy before and yet much happier after becoming boys. both of
these cases were non-spontaneous changes—the children changed
back to boys after their parents told them about their childhoods. it is
certainly possible that these children would have stayed girls without
their parents’ revelation. if this happened, scientists who studied them
would probably say that they had successfully adjusted to the female
role. but this would have been misleading in a serious way.
the children who remain girls are especially poignant. with one
exception, none knows her birth status. reiner’s descriptions of them
suggest that they are less than happy. indeed, reiner thinks that all the
cloacal cases born as boys would be happier as boys rather than girls,
because their brains have been biologically prepared for the male role.
he thinks that those who remain girls are at best missing out, and at
worst are experiencing great inner torment. he thinks their parents
should tell them and, essentially, let them choose their sex.
reiner’s results, on top of the publicity surrounding the david
reimer case, have provoked a reconsideration of the practices and
beliefs of the past 25 years.this is not to say that reiner has persuaded
everyone. reiner’s results are so contrary to expectations that some
scientists have privately questioned them.the skeptics don’t think that
reiner is making up his results. rather, their complaint is that he must
be doing something to cause the high rate of gender identity change
in the cloacal exstrophy children he has studied. perhaps he asks leading questions that cause children to question their gender identity
more than they otherwise would. perhaps he encourages parents to
reconsider the wisdom of rearing the children as girls. (however, the



52

the man who would be queen

parents i spoke to denied that reiner did this.) i find it difficult to
imagine anything reiner might have done that could have been so
extreme as to make an otherwise happily adjusted child want to reverse sex. i think of my own daughter and cannot imagine her deciding to be a boy, even if i lied to her and told her that she was born one.
if reiner has gone further than other researchers—and at this point
there is no evidence that he has—it has had the result of providing a
more accurate scientific picture and a more humane outcome for boys
born with cloacal exstrophy.
*********
i imagine introducing the ryan and johnson families to each
other. i would like mrs. ryan to meet jason johnson, to hear about his
history, to see him now. i’d like to see danny and jason together. i’d
like to show them to a stranger and ask “which of these boys do you
think was raised as a girl?”
jason johnson was castrated at birth, told he was a girl named
amanda, and at least initially, treated like a girl. but it didn’t take, and
now he is jason again. danny ryan was raised as a boy, and at times
harshly punished for not acting like one. he has arguably become
more boy-like, at least on the surface. but where did danny’s extreme
femininity come from in the first place?
theories about boys like danny range from nurture to nature.
the nurture hypotheses include the idea that danny’s mother consciously or unconsciously wanted a girl and so undermined his masculine development; that mrs. ryan was so unavailable to danny during infancy that danny became his mother, in effect, in order to always
have her with him; and that more generally, danny’s parents’ socialization of danny as a boy was inconsistent and ambivalent.
i find these ideas to be implausible, and i have named their ilk
“looked at ‘em funny” theories of gender identity. according to these
theories, you can call a child a girl (or boy), give her (or him) a sextypical name and the stereotypical toys and clothing associated with



the boy who would not be a girl

53

her (his) sex, but what really matters are very subtle features of parentchild interaction. these subtle features are not usually well specified,
and when they are, they don’t appear to be that unusual or specifically
linked to gender identity problems. for example, mrs. ryan was depressed and inattentive when danny was born, but most depressed,
inattentive mothers don’t have sons like danny. if gender identity development could be undermined by subtle miscommunication between parents and their children, then gender identity problems would
not be rare. but they are rare, except in cases of boys castrated at birth
and reared as girls.
what about nature theories? in general, the theory that danny’s
femininity is inborn would begin with the idea that prior to birth his
brain was not masculinized the same way that jason johnson’s was.
because male hormones such as testosterone are probably responsible
for making boys’ brains masculine, we would infer that danny’s brain
was either exposed to low levels of testosterone or insensitive to
testosterone’s effects.
the one difficulty with this hypothesis is that anatomically, danny
appears to be a normal boy. if danny’s body had little or no testosterone during all of prenatal life, it would show. danny wouldn’t have a
normal penis, for example. it is possible that hormonal effects on the
brain occur after penile development. classic research on monkeys
shows how this might work.when female rhesus monkeys were given
testosterone in the womb, effects depended on the timing. if they
received the hormone during their first trimester they had enlarged
clitorises but played like female monkeys. if they received only a late
dose, they had normal female genitalia but played rough, like male
monkeys. perhaps danny’s testosterone levels were normal during his
early prenatal life but low, for a boy, during later prenatal life.
the fact is that we don’t know enough about hormonal effects on
the human brain to have a very specific theory of how danny’s brain
could have developed in a feminine direction while his body developed masculine. if danny’s body also showed signs of feminine devel-



54

the man who would be queen

opment, this would support nature theory, but the lack of anatomical
femininity does not disprove it.
there has been essentially no research on boys like danny that is
directly biological. short of dissecting the brain of a feminine boy and
comparing it with normal boys’ and girls’ brains, it is unclear what we
would even look for. however, the best conceivable direct test of nurture theory has been tried, and it failed. amanda became jason again.



part ii
the man
he might become





t

he six men addressing my undergraduate sexuality class have two
things in common. first, they all
look fabulous: fit, muscular men, with square jaws, short neat hair, and
stylish masculine clothes. they look like models from j. crew or banana republic catalogues, which may be one reason why many more
female than male students are asking them questions. i see the looks
on the women’s faces as they listen to the panel, and they convey
wistful attraction.this is due to the hopeless nature of the attraction—
hopeless not because the men are 10 years older than my students, but
because of the second thing the men have in common: they are all gay.
because the class’s subject is sexuality, i have asked my students
not to hold back from asking questions of interest even if the questions are personal or explicit. (the men on the panel have assured me
that such questions are okay.) the students eagerly oblige.
“how and when did you come out to your family?” answers ranged
from rick’s “i haven’t yet” to ben’s humorous account of telling his
mother: “she was visiting me at college and i took her out to dinner. i
told her ‘i have something to tell you,’ and she looked very worried. at
that point the waiter leaned over and said to me ‘just tell her honey!’
when i told her, she was relieved and said that she had been afraid i was
angry at her.”
“did you ever have sex with a woman?” four of the guys have (two
enjoyed it, and two did not), and two have not.
“can you give the girls in the class some oral sex tips?” the men agreed
that it is important to actually enjoy giving oral sex, and not to use one’s
teeth.
“do you really enjoy it when a man with a large penis has anal sex
with you?” answer: “honey, you don’t know what you’re missing.”

57



58

the man who would be queen

“professor bailey says that gay men are usually feminine during
childhood. does that describe your childhoods?” i am happy that
someone has brought this up, and i am eager to hear the panel’s responses. ben says,“i wasn’t much different than other boys.what about
the rest of you guys? anyone want to say anything?” for a few moments the remaining men look at each other and shrug, and then ben
says “next question?”
i am disappointed with the lost opportunity to hear recollections
of childhood femininity.to be sure, many gay men do not recall being
markedly feminine boys, and a few even recall being more masculine
than average. but i suspect that this panel does not consist only of gay
men with masculine boyhoods. rather, i think the guys avoided the
question. this explanation is consistent with their body language and
their eagerness to go on to the next question. it is also consistent with
my past experience talking with many gay men about femininity, especially femininity during childhood.
i immediately think of two episodes during my career as a scientist studying this issue. the earliest occurred in dallas, where i had
traveled to interview gay twins for a study regarding the genetics of
sexual orientation. i had a standard interview, which included questions about childhood gender nonconformity. (“were you ever called
a sissy?” “did you ever dress up in girls’ clothes?” and so on.) i had
noticed that during this part of the interview some of the gay twins
looked uncomfortable. one twin in dallas took a long time to answer—he had, in fact, been a very feminine boy—and then he told
me, “i haven’t thought about those things in years.” i think he wished
i hadn’t made him remember.
the second incident occurred recently when i gave a talk at a
conference on sexual orientation. during my talk i showed a short
video of a feminine boy dressing in girls’ clothes and playing with
dolls. afterwards, a local gay politician approached me, smiling uncomfortably. he thanked me for my presentation and said that he
thought it was extremely important work. but he confessed that



the man he might become

59

watching the boy in the video was a wrenching, “obscene” experience
for him. he had just revisited his own childhood from his present
perspective and found it disturbing.
reactions like these have been common among the gay men i’ve
spoken to about childhood femininity. in fact, of all the controversial
topics related to male homosexuality, the contention that gay men
tend to have been feminine boys (and may be feminine men) has
provoked the most discomfort and dispute. initially, i found this odd,
because the link between childhood gender nonconformity and adult
homosexuality is one of the largest and best established associations
regarding sexual orientation. but after repeatedly encountering this
kind of reaction, i began to think something interesting was going on.
i made up a word to describe gay men’s attitude: femiphobia. (independently, the writer tim bergling came up with “sissyphobia.”)
why are gay men femiphobic? part of it is adverse childhood
experience. i don’t think that either the gay twin or the gay politician
would endorse the belief that childhood femininity is a bad thing, but
both behaved as if it were something to be ashamed of. i inferred that
as boys, both men had been subject to the shame-inducing disapproval
of others, including parents and peers.to be reminded of this is unsettling. but i have come to realize that it is not only childhood mistreatment that causes gay men to react negatively to the suggestion that
they are, or were, feminine.to explain the other reasons requires some
additional knowledge, and so i will return to them.
*********
i live in a section of chicago called “wrigleyville,” due to its
proximity to wrigley field, the home of the chicago cubs. i live
between two major streets. half a block to the west is clark street,
which borders wrigley field, and which contains scores of singles bars
filled with young heterosexual people. half a block to the east is
halsted street, which is the central artery of “boy’s town,” chicago’s
historic gay district. halsted is lined with gay bars, filled mainly with



60

the man who would be queen

gay men. (my favorite names are “manhole” and “cocktail.”) i visit
with friends in both places, sometimes during the same evening, and it
is difficult for me to do so without my scientist hat. on some nights i
am struck by the differences between gay and heterosexual men. on
other nights i am impressed by their similarity. it all depends on which
aspects of behavior i am focusing on.
gay men are comprised of a mixture of male-typical and femaletypical characteristics.the idea that gay and straight men differ only in
their preferred sex partners is wrong. the most general way in which
they differ is that many gay men are somewhat feminine in certain
respects. but even the most feminine gay men are not merely women
with penises.there are ways in which gay men are every bit as masculine as heterosexual men, and indeed, may even appear more masculine. psychologist sandra witelson has hypothesized that the brains of
homosexual people may be mosaics of male and female parts, and i
think she is right.this mixture explains much of what is unique in gay
men’s culture and lives.



chapter

4

gay femininity

d

anny ryan (the boy from part i) will
probably grow up to be a gay man,
but does this mean that most gay
men were boys like danny ryan? not necessarily. perhaps men who
were very feminine boys comprise only a very small subgroup of gay
men, the rest of whom had been just like other boys.
the easiest way to address this is to ask gay and straight men
about their childhoods. i have by now discussed childhood behavior
with hundreds of gay men, and my general impression is that the
typical gay man is noticeably more feminine than the typical straight
man, but that the degree of femininity that danny ryan displayed is
rare. (at least few gay men remember or acknowledge that degree of
femininity.)
we don’t have to rely on my impressions, however, because many
objective studies have been done on this question. in these studies, gay
and straight men are asked about their childhoods using questions like
those below.
61



62

the man who would be queen

rate your agreement with each item, from 1 (strongly disagree)
to 7 (strongly agree).
as a child i was called a “sissy” by my peers.
as a child i sometimes wished i had been born a girl rather than a boy.
as a child i preferred playing with girls rather than boys.
as a child i often felt that i had more in common with girls than boys.
as a child i sometimes wore feminine clothing (such as dresses), makeup,
or jewelry.
as a child i disliked competitive sports such as football, baseball, and
basketball.
i was a feminine boy.
in 1995, ken zucker and i reviewed more than 30 studies that
had given questionnaires like this to gay and straight men. we found
that, on average, gay men were much more feminine in their memories than straight men. the size of d (the effect size, which shows how
large a difference between two groups is) was 1.3, which is considered
quite large by conventional scientists. few interesting findings in the
behavioral sciences are this large. we estimated that the typical gay
man was more feminine than about 90 percent of straight men. on
the questions above, the average straight man gets an average of less
than 2 (on the 7-point scale); the average gay man gets about a 4.
of course, memories can be wrong. if there was some tendency
for gay men to exaggerate how feminine they were, or for straight
men to understate how feminine they were, these numbers could be
off. i have already suggested that gay men tend not to embrace the
idea that they are, or were, feminine, so i don’t think that gay men are
likely to be exaggerating. moreover, we have both prospective studies
like richard green’s showing that feminine boys become gay men, as
well as retrospective studies like ours showing that many gay men
were feminine boys. the simplest explanation is that both of these
findings are true.
one interesting observation about gay men’s memories is that



gay femininity

63

they are noticeably more variable than straight men’s. for example, on
the items above, straight men tend to be bunched up at the low end of
the scale, meaning that they are denying any significant femininity
during childhood. in contrast, gay men show more range in their
scores. perhaps 20 percent of gay men have scores similar to the straight
men, but a significant minority has scores around 6, meaning that they
are agreeing to every feminine item. if we can trust gay men’s memories, then some were feminine boys and others masculine. this could
mean that there are different types of gay men. at the very least it
means that we should be aware of potential variation. for example,
gay men who were feminine boys are likely to differ from gay men
who were masculine boys in adulthood as well. anyone who knows a
few gay men has noticed that they vary considerably in how gaystereotypical their behavior is. this variation may well begin in childhood.
*********
it is a crisp october sunday, and i am meeting ben (the leader of
the “gay guys panel” who spoke to my human sexuality class) and
some other friends at sidetracks on halsted street. it is about 3:30 pm,
and the chicago bears are playing. on clark street, a block away,
countless sports bars have the game on their large-screen projectors,
while men wearing bears jerseys flirt with similarly dressed women.
but not at sidetracks. here, the largely male crowd is watching video
performances of show tunes and singing along with fred astaire, john
travolta, and gordon macrae. (instead of “oklahoma ok!” they
sing “i’m a homo, ok!”) i imagine switching channels at sidetracks
and some clark street sports bar so that the straight guys have to
watch gene kelley and the gay guys have to watch the monsters of
the midway, and i find the thought amusing.
stereotypes about gay men—and about straight men—start with
their interests. gay men enjoy show tunes, acting (more generally, the
arts), fashion, decorating, dancing, and lots of sex. heterosexual men



64

the man who would be queen

enjoy football, baseball, basketball, hockey, shopping for stereo equipment and cars, and lots of sex. for about 30 years, from the late 1960s
until the late 1990s, it was de rigueur to scoff at these stereotypes and
look askance at those who believed them. but recently, science has
provided support for the stereotypes, in the only way that stereotypes
are ever true: on average.
of course, not all gay men like fashion, and some heterosexual
men do. let me save us a lot of tedious qualification by admitting that
not all gay men are alike, and not all straight men are alike, and some
gay men are very much like straight men (except, by definition, in
their sexual orientation).this is important to keep in mind, but it does
not invalidate the fact that there are some large differences between
typical gay men and typical straight men.
the leading researcher in this domain has been the psychologist,
richard lippa. lippa’s contribution has been doubly reactionary, because he has confirmed stereotypes about differences both between
men and women and between heterosexual and homosexual people.
lippa devised questionnaire measures of both occupational and recreational interests. (“rate your interest in being a jet pilot, nurse, fashion
designer, physicist….; going to art galleries, surfing, computers, aerobics….”) altogether, more than 100 occupations and hobbies are rated.
one can then compute a total score on the questionnaire, that i will
call “feminine interests,” by adding all the ratings for stereotypically
feminine interests and subtracting all the ratings for masculine interests. he originally studied male and female college students, who might
be expected to be less subject to stereotypes than other people. for
example, few of my students, male or female, would say that men and
women should be encouraged to pursue different careers. many of
them doubt that their interests diverge from those of the other sex.
from my classes at northwestern university, few women will become
nurses, and few men will become jet pilots. still, even at northwestern, lippa’s scales yielded huge differences. conventionally, sex differences (and more generally, differences between two groups) are mea-



gay femininity

65

sured as “d”: d values of 0.2 or less are considered small; ds up to 0.8 are
considered moderate; and ds above 0.8 are considered large. the sex
difference in height is about 2.0, which is whopping. one would have
to be perverse to deny that the sexes differ in height, on average,
although of course (for the last time), some women are taller than
some men. lippa’s scale usually yields a d between men and women
that approximates the size of the sex difference in height.
stereotypes about gay men (and thus, necessarily, straight men)
include occupational and recreational differences. (quick: one man is
a hairdresser, and the other is a marine sergeant.which one is gay?) in
one sense, then, it is obvious that lippa would use his questionnaire to
study sexual orientation differences. knowing the sensibility of academic psychology in the late 1990s, however, lippa’s research seems
bold. in several studies, he has found that gay men are midway between heterosexual men and women in their sex-typed interests. the
sexual orientation differences are large, although only half the sex difference. i have found similar results using lippa’s questionnaire with a
non-student sample. furthermore, the gay men who were most feminine during boyhood tend to have the most feminine interests as adults.
perhaps not surprisingly, feminine occupational interests appear to be
the continuation of feminine childhood interests.
there is more than one take on these findings, however. many
people find the idea of intrinsically feminine interests to be preposterous. they think that what men find interesting and what women find
interesting are socially arbitrary. somehow, “society” decides that certain tasks are masculine and others feminine, and because of this decision, men and women are socialized to do different things, in order to
conform. differences, both between men and women and between
gay and heterosexual men, reflect historical accidents rather than more
fundamental differences. i call the idea that men and women (and gay
and straight men) have cross-culturally consistent (and probably innate) differences in interests the “psychological” hypothesis. this is
because it suggests that the sexes, and the sexual orientations, are really



66

the man who would be queen

psychologically different. the competing idea, that these differences
are largely arbitrary, is known as the “sociological” hypothesis. this
hypothesis implies that men and women, or gay and straight men, are
the same psychologically, and that behavioral differences between them
reflect sociological factors such as group identity. obviously, the question is at least somewhat amenable to scientific study. for example, we
can see whether the kind of activities preferred by gay men has some
consistency across cultures.
but before we study gay men in other cultures, it is useful to
know what they are like in ours. here in chicago just past the turn of
the century, i think i observe a preponderance of gay men in the
following occupations: florists, waiters, hair stylists, actors (or at least
acting students), classical musicians (but not rock musicians), psychologists (or at least psychology students) and psychiatrists, antique sellers,
fashion and interior designers, yoga and aerobics instructors, masseurs,
librarians, flight attendants, nurses, clothing retail salesmen (e.g., at the
gap and banana republic), web designers (but not software or hardware designers), and catholic priests. assuming i’m right—and i may
not be in some cases—do these occupations have anything in common? one main thing is that with the exception of the priesthood
(from which they are barred), women express higher than average
interest in them. another piece of the picture, noticed by lippa, is that
many (but not all) of these occupations require interacting in a social
context. a major distinction between different occupations is that
some require interacting with people while others are more focused
on inanimate things such as machines. on average, the occupations i
listed—especially nursing, retail sales, psychology, waiting tables, and
flight attending—are relatively high on the “people” side of this distinction. but that hardly captures everything. there is also an aesthetic/artistic component (acting, designing, and even collecting antiques reflect this). the other distinction i think figures in some of
them (clothing retail sales, hair styling, aerobics) is a concern with
physical appearance.



gay femininity

67

although i am fairly certain that a well-done scientific study
would find disproportionate numbers of gay men in the occupations i
listed, the definitive, comprehensive study hasn’t been done. i have
done the only study i know of about a particular occupation. it is an
occupation i purposefully omitted from the list above. did you notice
something missing?
*********
around 1995 a northwestern undergraduate who was interested
in a question related to homosexuality approached me. the undergraduate, michael oberschneider, was somewhat older, in his late
twenties, and appeared to be straight. (among other indications he
mentioned a girlfriend.) he explained that he was delayed en route to
college by a career in ballet, including a stint in the boston ballet
company. he had long wondered why so many of his fellow male
dancers were gay. i had wondered about this, too, and suggested collaborating. michael agreed, and he embarked on a most ambitious
study. before it was over, he had interviewed 136 professional dancers
from around the country, including several well-known choreographers: 48 gay men, 42 heterosexual men, 45 heterosexual women, and
1 lesbian.
we got our participants haphazardly, primarily from michael’s professional connections and their connections, and so on, and therefore,
they do not comprise a random or representative sample. still, we
presumed that they knew much more about the sexual orientation of
professional dancers in general than other people did. we asked each
participant to give an estimate of the percentage of male dancers who
are gay. on average, they estimated 58 percent; the smallest percentage
anyone gave was 25 percent. compared with a rate of 2-4 percent in
the general population, this is a huge difference. the average proportion of gay men in the dancers’ own companies—which presumably
they could estimate fairly accurately—was 53 percent.
we interviewed only one lesbian dancer, because she was the only
one we could find. consistent with this, all dancers gave low estimates



68

the man who would be queen

for the rate of lesbianism among female dancers, for an average of 3
percent. professional dance is not generally a homosexual occupation;
it is a gay male occupation.
we also asked participants how and when they got interested in
dancing. the gay men actually got started a couple of years later than
straight men (age 13 compared to 11). when asked what initially motivated them, about 60 percent of heterosexual dancers said that their
parents had encouraged them. (heterosexual men and women gave
similar responses.) in contrast, only 13 percent of gay men said they
got into dance this way. instead, half the gay men said they got interested in dance by themselves, compared with only 19 percent of the
straight dancers. for example, one gay dancer recalled watching the
jackie gleason show at age 6 and seeing the june taylor dancers.
immediately, he decided that was his career goal. although he was
unable to obtain a position with the june taylor dancers (who were
all women), he became a prominent choreographer.
we also gave the male dancers questionnaires about memories of
childhood femininity. we expected to find smaller sexual orientation
differences than usual, because we thought that straight male dancers
probably were not the most masculine boys. instead, we found larger
differences than usual. contrary to our expectations, the straight male
dancers were similar to other heterosexual men to whom we have
given the questionnaire.the gay male dancers recalled especially feminine childhoods compared with the straight dancers, but also with
other samples of gay men we have studied.
overall, our study suggests that many gay dancers were very feminine boys who discovered dance on their own. pursuing a career in
dance requires a great deal of both talent and dedication. what is it
about feminine boys that ensures that as adults, they will be overrepresented in professional dance by about a factor of twenty? it is
possible that such boys possess some innate talent that makes them
good dancers. because i do not have an ounce of relevant ability, it is
difficult for me to imagine a specific hypothesis. i think that the more



gay femininity

69

significant part of the story must be the intense early interest that
feminine boys have. my son was 10 years old when we began our
dance study. one day i explained what we were studying, and i asked
him why i might expect to find a high rate of gay male dancers. he
immediately answered, “because dancing is feminine, and gay men
tend to be feminine.” i was pleased by his answer, which was also mine.
it seemed to me that if a 10-year-old boy could come up with the
hypothesis, then scientific reviewers of our study would not find it farfetched. (indeed, some of my friends made fun of me for studying
something they already considered to be an obvious fact.)
danny ryan (our feminine boy from chapter 1) has recently
begun ballet lessons. he has also been to the opera, and he enjoyed it.
(how many eight-year-old boys enjoy the opera?) he has attended
mass and has already asked to become an altar boy when he is old
enough. (his mother thinks that this has to do with the altar boys’
costumes, which look like dresses.) because of the intense competition for these careers, he will probably not become an opera singer,
ballet dancer, or priest. he is more likely to become an accountant.
still, twenty years from now on any october sunday, he is more likely
to be singing show tunes somewhere than to be cheering for the
chicago bears.
*********
the actor from the second city comedy troupe plays several roles
this evening, and one of them is a gay man. we know almost instantly
when the actor becomes that character—not because he says “i’m
gay” or puts the moves on any men or mentions a feminine occupation. it’s the way he talks. male comedians in the united states are
often adept at affecting, for wont of a better term, a “gay accent.” this
suggests two things. first, people recognize the accent, and so perhaps
some gay men really do speak that way. second, people must think
that a character with a gay accent is funny.
another anecdote involving my son: when he was 10 years old,



70

the man who would be queen

we were sitting in a theater waiting for the movie to start. a man
behind us was speaking, and my son leaned over and said, “dad, there’s
someone for you to study.” my son knows that i study sexual orientation, and this was his way of suggesting that the man sounded gay. the
content of the man’s speech was unremarkable, and so the only clue
my son had was the way the man was speaking. immediately before
my son made his remark, i had had the same intuition. i was struck
that a 10-year-old boy could have absorbed this cultural stereotype—
i had never talked with him about it. of course, i did not get the
opportunity to check the accuracy of our judgments by asking the
man about his sexuality.
i cannot imitate the gay accent, and i cannot even describe it, but
chances are, you know what i’m talking about. done well, it does not
include a lisp, which is the lazy straight man’s way of pretending to
speak like a gay man. before worrying much what the gay accent is, it
seems more important to determine whether there is any truth in the
notion that gay men speak differently. and so i did the following
study.
we recruited homosexual and heterosexual men and women to
the lab to provide several types of data. we got approximately 30 from
each group; the relevant groups here are gay and heterosexual men.
the relevant data, for now, consisted of short speech samples. every
subject read the harvard sentences, a collection of sentences that are
interesting to linguists because they contain all the phonemes (elemental sounds) of the english language. some example sentences
include:
it’s easy to tell the depth of a well.
four hours of steady work faced us.
help the woman get back to her feet.
the soft cushion broke the man’s fall.
subjects read the sentences into a microphone connected to a
computer, which stored the recordings. next, we recruited an entirely



gay femininity

71

different sample of homosexual and heterosexual men and women to
listen to the four sentences given above. this new sample (listeners)
rated each person in the first sample (speakers) on a scale from 1 (very
heterosexual sounding) to 7 (very gay sounding).
results were striking. the size of d (the effect size) was about 2.0,
as large a difference between gay and heterosexual men as i have observed (except, of course, when we ask about their sexual orientations). only 10 percent of the heterosexual men were rated above 4,
on average—4 represents a “neutral” score of neither gay nor heterosexual. in contrast, 75 percent of the gay men were rated above 4.
excluding one very unusual straight speaker (rated a 4.9), two-thirds
of gay speakers were rated as gayer sounding than any straight speaker.
by these data we would conclude that if a man sounds gay, he probably is.
the qualifications here are interesting. about 25 percent of gay
men were rated well within the typical range of straight speakers. furthermore, there was more than twice as much variation (in statistical
language, variance) among the gay speakers than among the straight
speakers. clearly, not all gay men speak in a recognizable pattern.
there is something to the stereotype that many gay men speak in
a characteristic way. what is that way? although some laypeople might
have sufficiently skilled ears to discern the precise differences between
gay and straight male speech, i do not. in the present stage of research,
therefore, i am collaborating with linguists (more specifically,
phoneticists), who make their living by listening for, identifying, and
studying such differences. my collaborator has said this:
generally speaking, i’d say that the vowels appear to be shifted in a direction that would suggest a more fronted articulation. (for women, the vocal
tract is shorter and differently proportioned, and the vowel shift may reflect
modeling on the characteristic patterns of women’s vowels.) in addition, we
think we may be hearing more careful or precise articulation.we also think
we may be hearing an articulation of /s/ that has the tongue positioned
more towards the teeth, as opposed to the alveolar ridge (which is that hard
ridge behind your upper teeth).



72

the man who would be queen

for the non-linguists among us, there are three main ideas here.
first, gay men might pronounce vowels with their tongues more forward and to the top of the mouths than straight men do. second, gay
men might speak more precisely, articulating the sounds that straight
men pronounce lazily. (try reading this sentence both in your normal
speaking voice and then in a carefully articulated voice. does the latter
sound more gay?) third, gay men might produce sibilant “s” sounds,
sounding somewhat hiss-like. if true, this observation may account for
the idea that gay men lisp. all these hypotheses are testable, and soon
we will know whether they are correct.whether or not these particular ideas are correct, something makes a large subset of gay men readily
identifiable by the way they speak just a few words.
how do gay men come to speak differently than straight men?
consistent with the central theme of this book, the first hypothesis
that comes to my mind is that gay men are speaking in a feminine
manner. that is, to the extent that gay men have recognizable speech
patterns, those patterns may be somewhat like those of women or
girls. both straight and gay people tend to label the gay accent as a
“feminine” speech pattern. however, it is unclear at this time what the
gay accent is, much less whether it is feminine. if gay men wanted to
speak like women, the most obvious way to do this would be to speak
in a higher pitch, the way that many transsexuals and drag queens (in
their female persona) do. but no one thinks they hear gay men speaking in a higher pitch. the idea that gay speech is feminine speech
remains a hypothesis, for now.
if it is true, then there are at least two ways that gay men could
come to speak in a feminine way. one is through (perhaps unconscious) imitation. this is particularly plausible if the gay accent is acquired during childhood, when feminine boys are most likely to have
strong wishes to be the other sex. perhaps they are attending to the
ways that girls and women speak differently than boys and men, and
imitating the former. the alternative hypothesis is that human males
and females speak differently in part because their brains are innately



gay femininity

73

different (due to early hormonal influences, for example), and that the
brain centers affecting articulation are somewhat feminized in gay men.
the gay humorist david sedaris wrote a story about being treated
by a speech therapist for a year during grade school. he wrote that
virtually all the boys seen by the therapist were sissies, like him. if this
is even partly true, it suggests that some features of the gay accent
begin during childhood. however, both ken zucker and richard
green, who have worked extensively with feminine boys, have told
me that young boys do not show it. they think it begins during late
childhood or adolescence.this is an unusual time to acquire an accent,
and it raises the possibility of cultural influence. if my 10-year-old son
knows what it means to sound gay, so can these feminine boys who are
becoming gay men. could they be embracing and expressing their
future identity? if so, the gay accent might not be feminine at all.
rather, it might be the product of the same kinds of semi-random
factors that, for example, make americans living below the masondixon line speak in a “southern drawl.” if this is true, there is still an
important and puzzling distinction between the acquisition of a southern accent and a gay accent: southerners grow up amidst people who
speak with a southern accent; gay men do not grow up amidst people
who speak with a gay accent.
*********
i often don’t have to hear a man talk or know what he does in
order to have a strong suspicion he’s gay. sometimes it’s enough just to
see him move. if i see a man walking and displaying serious hip action,
or keeping his elbow in while moving his forearm around; or if i see
him standing with arms crossed and hands on shoulders; or if i see him
sitting and waving his hands around a certain way when telling a story,
my “gaydar” is likely to go off.
in 1999 psychologist nalini ambady of harvard university published a study suggesting that homosexual people do in fact move
differently than heterosexual people. in this study, she recruited ho-



74

the man who would be queen

mosexual and heterosexual men and women (targets) to be videotaped. then she recruited a second set of homosexual and heterosexual people (judges) to view photographs, 1-second videotape segments, or 10-second videotape segments of the targets and try to
estimate the targets’ sexual orientation using this information. the
three types of visual stimuli differ in the amount of “dynamic information”—the amount of information about movement. photographs
obviously contain little information about movement (although they
might conceivably give some clues about posture), 1-second clips a bit
more, and 10-second clips the most. she found that people’s accuracy
in estimating men’s sexual orientation increased with the amount of
dynamic information. furthermore, even when she removed all static
information—clothing, hairstyle, and so on—by using a computer to
generate only the outline of the targets during their 10-second clips—
people could judge men’s sexual orientation better than by chance
alone. however, ambady didn’t try to identify the specific components of targets’ movement that judges used to make their decision.
indeed, she refrains from even speculating that the relevant information has anything to do with femininity.
our lab took a slightly different approach. we used the same subjects who were the targets in our gay speech study, and we videotaped
them walking down the hall, standing briefly, and then sitting briefly
while conversing with one of us. rather than recruiting new subjects
to rate the targets, we found an existing rating scale that had been
developed during the 1970s to study “sex role motor behavior.” the
table on the right shows some of the items that raters considered. two
students in my lab watched the videotapes and rated the subjects using
the scale.
the results were quite similar to the results of the gay speech
study. there was a large difference between gay and straight men.
again, there was much more variation among the gay than among the
straight men. only one straight man exhibited marked feminine movements. him aside, 40 percent of the gay men were rated as more
feminine than the most feminine heterosexual man.



gay femininity

75

masculine and feminine traits
walking
masculine

feminine

long strides, free knee action
minimum hip movements
foot placement – straddling a line
arm movements from shoulder
firm wrist action
arms hang loosely from shoulders

short strides, controlled knee action
pronounced hip movements
stepping on a line
arm movements from elbow
limp wrist action
upper arms held fairly close to body
standing

masculine

feminine

feet apart
arm movements from shoulder
firm wrist action
hand(s) in pocket

feet together
arm movements from elbow
limp wrist action
hands on hips
sitting

masculine

feminine

buttocks away from chair back
leg not crossed or ankle on knee
precise hand motions
arm movements from shoulder
firm wrist action

buttocks close to chair back
legs crossed, knee on knee
graceful hand motions
arm movements from elbow
limp wrist action

one important difference between our movement study and our
speech study is that we were able to use the same movement scale to
score both men and women. not surprisingly, the scale yielded a huge
sex difference. gay men scored in the direction of heterosexual
women, although they were much closer to heterosexual men. although we don’t know yet whether a gay accent is a feminine accent,



76

the man who would be queen

we can conclude that gay men move in feminine ways. and this starts
early, at least for some gay men.
richard green videotaped some of his feminine and masculine
boys, and some girls, wearing clothes that concealed their sex (a bathing cap, for example). masculine boys were clearly distinguishable from
girls; feminine boys were not. some of the feminine boys were as
young as four years old.
in our study of sexual orientation and dance, we asked whether
dancers could distinguish gay and straight male dancers by the way
they dance, and most responded that they could. they elaborated that
gay men were more feminine, and perhaps more dramatic, in their
movements.
*********
the main characters of the movie, the birdcage (originally a french
film, la cage aux folles) are a gay couple. one of them is a very
masculine man, and the other is a flamboyant drag queen. in the movie,
they clearly take separate roles as husband and wife, and this is a common stereotype about gay relationships. in this chapter i have been
arguing for the accuracy of some stereotypes about gay men. what
about this one?
in 1995 i became interested in using personal advertisements to
study gay men’s mating psychology. one can learn a lot about what
people want in mates by studying these ads. they cost money, for one
thing, and when people have to pay for each word, they try to make
every word count.when describing whom they’re looking for, people
often have a mixture of idiosyncratic desires (“likes opera” or “enjoys
camping”), but when the same preferences recur in ad after ad (“tall,
dark, handsome, and rich” or “attractive, sexy, and fit”), you know
these are commodities that most people want. for example, psychologists have analyzed personal ads to show that straight men are much
more concerned than straight women about a potential mate’s looks;
straight women are more concerned about resources and the ability to



gay femininity

77

acquire them: income, wealth, ambition, a good job, and intelligence.
you can also tell a lot about the mating market by the way advertisers
describe themselves. advertisers want to entice readers to answer their
ads, and are sometimes quite creative in their self-description. so the
self-descriptive adjectives also tend to be those that are highly valued.
when my lab first started looking at gay personal advertisements,
we were struck by a couple of differences from straight ones. first, gay
men’s ads were much more explicitly sexual than straight men’s were—
i will explain why i think this is so in the next chapter. the other
difference was that gay men’s ads used many more words related to
gender conformity and nonconformity, such as masculine, feminine,
butch, femme, straight-acting, straight-appearing, and flaming. this
suggested that these traits were important to many gay men, but how
so? if gay men tended to pair off as in the birdcage, we would expect to
see both advertisements in which the advertiser described himself as
“masculine” (or “butch” or “straight-acting” or something similar) and
requested a “feminine” (or “femme” or “flaming”) partner; and advertisements with the reverse pattern (“flamer looking for butch guy….”).
we would expect to see similar numbers of both types. in order to
check our expectation, we looked at more than 2,700 personal ads
placed by gay men. for each ad, we looked for gender-related words
and we kept count of how often the advertiser: (a) requested a masculine partner, (b) requested a feminine partner, (c) described himself as
masculine, and (d) described himself as feminine. forty one percent of
all the ads had some gender-related word.
what we learned suggested that the birdcage is indeed fiction.
when advertisers requested either masculine or feminine characteristics in a partner, they requested masculine traits 96 percent of the time.
furthermore, when they described themselves as masculine or feminine, it was masculine 98 percent of the time. both what gay men seek
and how they represent themselves suggest that they are massively
biased in favor of masculinity. or is it a bias against femininity? in all
72 ads in which an advertiser was explicit about what kind of gender-



78

the man who would be queen

related trait he did not want, it was a feminine trait; “no femmes” was
the most common request.
these results raise at least a couple of questions. first, if gay men
are almost all so masculine (as their self-descriptions imply), why do
they bother requesting masculinity in partners? after all, most personal
advertisers don’t waste money asking for someone with four limbs,
because even if they have this preference, they can reasonably assume
that it applies to almost everyone. the answer is—and this will not
surprise most people who have answered a personal ad—that people
sometimes misrepresent themselves in a favorable way. how often do
advertisers describe themselves as having “below average looks,” even
though half the world should? this consideration, as well as everything i’ve discussed in this chapter, should make one skeptical about
accepting the masculine self-descriptions of gay male personal advertisers.
a second question is less easily dismissed. perhaps gay men who
place personal ads are not representative. perhaps their unusual characteristics or preferences are what necessitate placing such ads in the first
place. maybe most gay men love feminine men, and because feminine
gay men are plentiful, they don’t need to advertise for them.
to answer this question we did a second study. we made up mock
“gay dating brochures,” each of which profiled two competitors. each
profile had both a picture and a self-description of an ostensibly gay
man. some of the pictures were of very attractive men, others of
average-looking men, and the rest were of men we considered very
unattractive. one of the descriptions was:
good-looking masculine gay man in early twenties seeks partner for relationship. i am in shape and enjoy rollerblading, jogging, and tennis. i live in
the city and would like someone with whom i can share everything from
an exciting evening in town at the clubs to a relaxing day at the museum.
my hobbies include traveling, being outdoors, and listening to music.

the other descriptions were similar.the key word in the description above is “masculine.” a third of the time, that word was included



gay femininity

79

in the description; a third of the time,“feminine” was substituted for it;
and a third of the time neither “masculine” nor “feminine” was included. each brochure contained one description with either “masculine” or “feminine” and one description with neither term.
we went to a gay-oriented bookstore, a gay gym, and a gay pride
rally, and we asked gay men to look at the brochures and choose
which person they would prefer to date. most of those polled chose
the physically attractive men in the brochures—no surprise, gay men
like good-looking guys. but the raters also strongly preferred the brochures with the “masculine” self-description. substituting “feminine”
for “masculine” had about the same effect as substituting an averagelooking man’s picture for a very attractive one.
the idea that gay men want masculine partners may be surprising
to straight people, but it is less so to gay men. jaye davidson, the actor
who played the homosexual transsexual in the movie the crying game
explained: “to be homosexual is to like the ideal of sex. homosexual
men love very masculine men. and i’m not a very masculine person.”
the gay (and flaming) humorist quentin crisp speculated about gay
men:
to understand what kind of man they most admire it is only necessary to
guess what they wish they themselves were—young, frail, beautiful, and
refined. hence their predilection is for huge, violent, coarse brutes.

whether or not crisp’s explanation—gay men want masculine
men to feel more feminine— is correct, he recognized the preference.
when gay men say “no femmes,” what is it, exactly, that they are
eschewing? gay men tend to be feminine in several ways, including
their interests, their voices, and their movements. (although it is unclear that the gay accent is a feminine accent, even gay men discuss it
as if it is.) do gay men dislike hairdressers, men who speak with a gay
accent, men with limp wrists, or all three?
one relevant but surprising finding from our study of gay interests, speech, and movement patterns is that a gay man who acts femi-



80

the man who would be queen

nine in one respect doesn’t necessarily display other feminine traits.
for example, gay men who sound the gayest do not tend to be the
ones with the most feminine movements or the most feminine occupations. if our results are correct, then knowing that a gay man is a
hairdresser tells you nothing about how he sounds or moves.
when i ask my gay friends about what feminine traits they dislike,
they usually begin by talking about the voice. an older acquaintance
related how once in a gay bathhouse, he was on the verge of having
sex with a very attractive and muscular stranger, when the stranger
spoke. “when he opened his mouth, a purse fell out. i got limp.” but
when i went to a halsted bar with my gay graduate student, he was
able to determine which men he would likely reject merely by watching them move. we don’t yet really know what gay men mean when
they say they dislike femmes.
this leaves the question of why. when i talk about this with
other psychologists, the most common suggestion is internalized femiphobia—femininity has been punished so often by the straight world
that gay men, too, come to hate it. this makes sense to me, but it is
not the only plausible hypothesis. another is that behavioral masculinity characterizes the prototypic man. if one is attracted to men,
then one will be attracted to those with masculine behavior. the
second hypothesis is less malevolent but more pessimistic than the
first. the second hypothesis implies that femiphobia is not due to
societal intolerance but is intrinsic to male homosexuality and is not
remediable even by reforming straight society to make it less homophobic. it suggests that across time and place, gay men will desire
masculine men, and thus, acknowledging their own femininity makes
them feel undesirable. we don’t know yet how universal the gay male
preference for masculinity is, although most of my foreign gay friends
say that it is true in their locales as well.
earlier in this chapter i suggested that having been mistreated as
feminine boys is not the only reason gay men tend to react uncomfortably to the implication that they are, or used to be, feminine. the



gay femininity

81

other reason, which i hope is now obvious, is that gay men themselves
dislike femininity, or at least they find it sexually unattractive. to call a
gay man “feminine” is not only to say that he is a target of many
straight men’s ill will, but also that he is less attractive than he would
be otherwise. it is certainly an unfortunate state of affairs that gay men
tend to be feminine, tend to be less attracted to femininity, but tend to
be stuck with each other. there are similar ironies in straight relationships. the designer of the universe has a perverse sense of humor.
*********
until 1973 homosexuality was considered a “mental illness.” during that year, the american psychiatric association eliminated it from
its diagnostic manual (the dsm)—immediately curing perhaps 2 percent of the american population.
one of the influential events preceding the removal of homosexuality from the dsm was the publication in 1957 by evelyn
hooker of a scientific paper in which she compared gay and straight
men’s responses on the rorschach test. the rorschach is the test that
requires people to say what they see in inkblots. hooker found that
psychologists couldn’t distinguish the answers of gay and straight men.
in those days, most psychologists thought it was an excellent test of
mental health. in recent times, the rorschach has fallen into increasing disfavor, and some of us think it is little better than reading tea
leaves. so the fact that psychologists couldn’t tell gay men from straight
men based on their rorschach scores is not very meaningful.
during the past five years several studies have been conducted by
giving large numbers of subjects standard psychiatric interviews, including questions about sexual behavior. in these studies, gay men
have tended to have more of certain psychological problems than
straight men. specifically, they have been more likely to be depressed
and anxious. one study found that gay men were more likely to have
a history of suicidal thoughts. this was true even when the comparison group was the gay men’s own identical twins. gay men are also



82

the man who would be queen

much more likely than straight men to have eating disorders like bulimia and anorexia.
we don’t really understand where these differences come from,
but there are at least two interesting possibilities. one is that gay men
have hard lives, particularly due to societal stigma, and this causes unhappiness and mental problems. this is the explanation that people
tend to accept automatically, particularly pro-gay people. however, it
might not be true. one of the studies that found higher rates of mental problems among gay men was conducted in the netherlands. the
netherlands is probably the most tolerant country in the world toward homosexual people. but gay men there were still about three
times as likely as straight men to have been depressed during the past
year.
another possibility is that gay men’s pattern of susceptibility to
certain (but not all) mental problems reflects their femininity. the
problems that gay men are most susceptible to—eating disorders, depression, and anxiety disorders—are the same problems that women
also suffer from disproportionately. we don’t really understand why
women are about twice as likely as men to become depressed during
their lifetimes. it might be that their social world is more depression
inducing. perhaps women experience more stress. alternatively, there
may be innate sex differences that make women more susceptible. no
one knows.
part of the explanation for the sex difference in depression involves basic psychological traits. in particular, the personality trait, neuroticism, is one of the strongest predictors of depression. neurotic
people are emotional worriers, and they react poorly to stress.women
are somewhat more neurotic than men, on average, although the difference isn’t large. gay men are also more neurotic than straight men,
although they are slightly less neurotic than women. of course, we
don’t know where the sex difference, or the gay-straight difference, in
neuroticism comes from. but genetic studies of twins suggest that it



gay femininity

83

could be at least partly inborn. even identical twins separated at birth
are similar in their degree of neuroticism.
learning why gay men are more easily depressed than straight
men might tell us why women are also. this knowledge would also
obviously take us closer to reducing depression among gay men.therefore, we keep our minds open until science makes us certain we understand the sex and sexual orientation differences in depression. regardless of what we learn, nothing i have written means that we should
return homosexuality to the dsm and again consider it mental illness.
many characteristics are associated with increased risk for certain problems. men commit much more violent crime than women, but women
are more depressed than men. young people are more likely to be
delinquent, old people to be demented. samoan adolescents commit
suicide at much higher rates than americans do. but we don’t conclude from these facts that being male, female, young, old, or samoan
is a mental illness. rather, the problems are being violent, depressed,
delinquent, demented, or suicidal. homosexuality, per se, is not a
problem.
*********
gay men might be feminine in another, sexual, respect. one of
the sex acts common between gay men is anal sex, and that act requires one man to be penetrated by another. this situation is analogous to that between heterosexual partners, in which a man is nearly
always the penetrator, and the woman the receptive partner. when
two gay men have anal sex, is the receptive one taking a feminine role?
not necessarily. men possess a prostate gland, an erogenous zone
which is often pleasurably stimulated during receptive anal sex. this
often feels good. bend over boyfriend, an instructional sex videotape
showing straight couples how women can (with appropriate equipment) anally penetrate their male partners, was a bestseller. among gay
men, enjoyment of anal penetration might sometimes reflect only a
desire to experience a particular type of sexual pleasure, rather than a



84

the man who would be queen

desire to enact a “feminine” role. perhaps being penetrated anally is
one of the perks of being a gay man.
but not all gay men prefer being penetrated. some prefer being
the penetrator. in common lingo, penetrators are “tops,” and receptive
partners “bottoms.” interest in this distinction increased during the
aids epidemic, because scientists discovered that the receptive partner in anal sex was at greatly increased risk for hiv. hiv researcher
james weinrich showed that gay men who preferred the receptive role
in anal intercourse were more likely than other gay men to remember
being feminine boys. similarly, our lab found that gay men who like to
be penetrated describe themselves as more feminine than other gay
men, although the association was not a strong one.
in our analysis of personal advertisements, we also looked at
whether advertisers requested or described a preferred sexual role. a
slight majority of advertisers described themselves as “bottoms” and
sought “tops.” in their sexual roles, gay men tend to be feminine. i
have heard the complaint that at every gay bar there are “1,000 bottoms looking for a top” (though our results suggest that this is an
exaggeration). one gay acquaintance related the following story, which
is not unusual among gay men: “i met this cute guy at the bar. he
seemed so butch and like such a stud, but when i got him home, the
first thing he did was throw his legs in the air.” (crisp discusses a
similar story in the naked civil servant.) a common saying in the gay
world is “butch in the streets, femme in the sheets.” gay men recognize that there is more than one way to be masculine, and that penetrative masculinity doesn’t have all that much to do with the other
ways.
the susceptibility of gay men to hiv infection might be due
partly to their preference for receptive anal sex, which i have suggested might be a feminine preference.the other major factor that has
made them vulnerable, however, is their masculinity, and it is to gay
masculinity that i now turn.



chapter

5

gay masculinity

i

am at a dinner party in honor of an
eminent professor, who happens to
be gay, and i notice my friend ben
conferring quietly with his boyfriend, charlie. charlie leaves the room,
and ben tells me what they were talking about. charlie had met a man
at the party that he found attractive, and he was asking ben whether it
was okay if he went home with the man to have sex. ben assured
charlie that this was fine, provided that he stayed within the bounds of
their agreement: they had to use condoms, and the liaison must be
exclusively sexual, and not romantic. ben chuckled bemusedly thinking of charlie’s hesitancy to believe that ben was really ok with this.
when ben’s panel of gay men speaks to my undergraduate class,
someone invariably asks them about their feelings concerning monogamy. the panel’s composition varies a bit from year to year, but
typically, a majority of the men say that monogamy is unimportant to
them. a couple of years ago, rick was the sole monogamous holdout

85



86

the man who would be queen

on the panel. i later learned that the next weekend, rick and his
boyfriend had opened their relationship to include sex with other
men in the form of threesomes. the idea of consensually nonmonogamous sexual relationships is, to say the least, challenging to the
typical northwestern university undergraduate.
the panel is also asked about the number of sex partners they
have had, and their answers always elicit gasps. all the men have had
hundreds of sex partners. ben correctly reminds us that it depends on
what we mean by sex—gay men don’t have vaginal intercourse much,
and most of the sex acts are oral. still, even using the broader definition of sex, the typical heterosexual northwestern student finds it
amazing that anyone has had so many partners.
there is a big sex difference in the way my students react to these
revelations. the women tend to be horrified, while the men are often
envious. although the straight men in my class have difficulty imagining the degree of cooperation necessary to have hundreds of sex partners, they have less difficulty understanding the desire to do so.
by heterosexual standards gay men are sexually promiscuous. although this was well known to those who paid attention, it became
clear to everyone during the aids epidemic. in a 1981 study by the
centers for disease control and prevention, aids patients with an
average age of 35 years reported an average of 60 sex partners per year,
or approximately 1,000 lifetime partners.
of course, the more sex partners a man has, the greater his risk of
contracting aids, so gay men with aids would be expected to have
more sex partners than other gay men. but surveys of gay men that
ignore hiv status also find large partner numbers. in a survey of gay
men from san francisco conducted in the 1970s (that is, pre-aids),
the typical gay man had had more than 500 sex partners, the large
majority of whom were one-time flings. many of these experiences
were anonymous—some took place in gay bathhouses, for example.
gay and straight men’s personal advertisements differ in this respect too. gay men’s ads are often very sexually explicit. (“wanted:



gay masculinity

87

masculine top for fuck buddy.”) although straight men often have
explicit sexual fantasies they want potential partners to fulfill, it is
doubtful that including them in personal ads would be very effective
in recruiting women.
gay men are less likely to enter meaningful sexual relationships.
surveys have found approximately 30 to 50 percent of gay men to be
attached at any one time, compared to approximately 75 percent of
lesbians and even higher percentages of heterosexuals.
social conservatives have taken facts like these as evidence for the
decadent and perverse nature of gay men. i think they’re wrong. gay
men who are promiscuous are expressing an essentially masculine trait.
they are doing what most heterosexual men would do if they could.
they are in this way just like heterosexual men, except that they don’t
have women to constrain them.
*********
evolutionary psychology seeks to explain some psychological sex
differences according to their evolutionary function, and interest in
casual sex has always seemed to me its most convincing story. the
currency of evolution—what determines how successful one has been,
evolutionarily speaking—is the number of offspring one leaves. in the
unconscious quest to maximize one’s reproductive output, men are
constrained most by the number of women they can have sex with. if
a man had the universal cooperation of women, he could leave thousands of offspring in his lifetime. but women do not, in general, benefit at all from having more than one sex partner. a single man with
average sexual ability can impregnate a woman often enough to guarantee that she will have as many children as she can have. thus, we
would expect evolution to have made men much more interested
than women in sexual variety and casual sex. casual sex with a variety
of women is potentially a reproductive bonanza for a man, because it
means that many more children carrying his genes will be out in the
world. in contrast, unless there is something very special about a casual



88

the man who would be queen

sex partner, women stand to gain little and lose much by having casual
sex with him. that is, they risk losing the chance for commitment
from and investment by other men.
i will mention several evolutionary arguments in this chapter, so
let me anticipate an objection: gay men are an evolutionary
anomaly—they generally don’t reproduce and pass on their genes—so
evolutionary arguments don’t apply to them. in fact, i agree that homosexuality remains an unexplained evolutionary paradox. however,
many of the adaptations that evolved due to heterosexuality are also
found in gay men. for example, gay men have penises, even though
they don’t use them for the purpose for which penises evolved, namely,
procreation.
regardless of whether one buys the evolutionary story, anyone
who has been out of the house, much less to a singles bar, knows that
men and women differ considerably in their approach to casual sex.
not all men want casual sex, and some women do, but the average
difference is large. determining just how large is difficult, because in
measuring someone’s casual sex interest our first impulse is simply to
count his number of sex partners. the problem with this approach is
that casual sex accomplishments are constrained by opportunity. in
order for a heterosexual man to have casual sex, he has to have a
willing female partner. if women aren’t built to be eager to jump into
bed with strangers, then straight men’s numbers of sex partners underestimate their interests. on average, heterosexual men and women
must have the same number of sex partners. this is not true of gay
men, who do not need to negotiate with women in order to have sex.
gay men have sex with other men, who have similar inclinations.
these inclinations include interest in sexual variety, and in having sex
without commitment.
i devised a questionnaire that tapped interest in casual sex and
sexual variety without asking for numbers of sex partners. the items
in the questionnaire were written so that either straight or gay men or
women could answer them.



gay masculinity

89

interest in casual sex
rate your agreement with each item, from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree)
1. i would consider having sex with a stranger, if i could be assured
that it was safe and s/he was attractive to me.
2. i like the idea of participating in a sex orgy.
3. i would not enjoy sex without any emotional commitment at all.
(this item is reverse scored.)
4. i do not need to respect or love someone in order to enjoy having
sex with him/her.
5. i can’t imagine spending the rest of my life with one sex partner.
6. sometimes i’d rather have sex with someone i didn’t care about.
7. monogamy is not for me.
8. i believe in taking sexual opportunities when i find them, as long
as no one gets hurt.
9. i could easily imagine myself enjoying one night of sex with someone i would never see again.
10. if an attractive person (of my preferred sex) approached me sexually, it would be hard to resist, no matter how well i knew him/her.
i gave the questionnaire to both gay and straight men, as well as to
lesbians and straight women. i also asked how many sex partners they’d
had. although gay men had had far more sex partners than straight
men, they scored nearly identically on the questionnaire measuring
interest. the number of partners of straight men was similar to those
of straight women and lesbians. these facts suggest that women are
responsible for the pace of sex. gay and straight men both want casual
sex, but only straight men have the brake of women’s sexually cautious
nature to slow them.
one e-mail listserv i subscribe to has a number of conservative
subscribers. recently, the topic of gay men’s sex lives came up, and the



90

the man who would be queen

(mostly male) commentators balked at the idea that they would behave as gay men do if women let them. i think it is instructive to think
about how many opportunities the typical heterosexual man gets to
have uncommitted sex with attractive strangers. probably not many
unless he is a rock star or movie star or looks like brad pitt. it is easy to
avoid opportunities that aren’t there.
the evolutionary anthropologist, donald symons, who first used
the example of gay men to draw inferences about the male psyche
wrote, “i am suggesting that heterosexual men would be as likely as
homosexual men to have sex most often with strangers, to participate
in anonymous orgies in public baths, and to stop off in public restrooms
for five minutes of fellatio on the way home from work if women
were interested in these activities. but women are not interested.”
*********
gay male couples tend to go through a typical sexual progression.
at first, when the relationship is new, sex is hot and heavy, and the
couple is happy being sexually exclusive with each other. but with
most couples, as the newness wanes so does the sexual excitement, and
eventually one or both partners seek sex elsewhere. in a study of 156
gay male couples in the pre-aids era, david mcwhirter and andrew
mattison found that most became nonexclusive within a year, and all
were non-monogamous within five years. this pattern often occurs
even as partners become increasingly committed to each other in other
ways—emotionally and financially, for example.
the opening of gay relationships to outside sex partners undoubtedly reflects the compromises necessary for two men to fulfill
their masculine desire for sexual variety. but it may also represent a
feminine characteristic that i have neglected to mention. many straight
men admit that they would love to have many more sex partners than
they do. however, few of these men would be eager to allow their
wives the same freedom.
straight men tend to be sexually jealous. gay men tend to be less



gay masculinity

91

so. one way to show this is to have people imagine their partner both
having sex with someone else and falling in love with someone else,
and then to choose which scenario is more disturbing. straight men
tend to find the sexual infidelity scenario more disturbing. straight
women and gay men tend to have the opposite reaction.
no one really knows why gay men react this way. it may simply
be the compromise they have to make in order to have as many sex
partners as they like. perhaps both women and gay men recognize
that their male sex partners are capable of having meaningless sex
with others. although this might not make either women or gay men
happy, it is preferable to their partners having meaningful sex, because
meaningful sex can more effectively end relationships. or gay men’s
decreased sexual jealousy might reflect a more fundamental feminine
trait. when straight men learn that their wives are unfaithful, they
often become violent. sexual jealousy is a major cause of domestic
abuse and spousal homicide, committed most often by men. however,
gay men are less physically aggressive compared with straight men. if
sexual jealousy and physical violence are intertwined, this could explain why gay men are less sexually jealous.
*********
in the course of my research on differences between gay and
straight men, we also took photographs of our subjects’ faces. in contrast to our results for speech and movement, raters could not tell gay
and straight men’s faces apart.this does not mean that gay and straight
men look the same, however.
i work out at two gymnasiums, one on my university’s campus,
and the other in boy’s town.the gay men at the latter are distinguishable from the mostly straight male students at the former. the gay
men are noticeably more muscular and have less body fat. when they
leave the gym, they are wearing tighter clothing, which reveals their
honed bodies. most of my female friends insist that gay men are better



92

the man who would be queen

looking than straight men, and perhaps they are, overall (i.e., counting
body as well as face). why might this be?
if gay men are better looking than straight men, it is because they
have to be. gay men are masculine in the emphasis they place on a
partner’s physical attractiveness. consider the questionnaire on the
importance of a partner’s physical attractiveness. when i gave that
questionnaire to straight and gay men and women, the women scored
lower than the men. gay and straight men scored similarly. (before we
accuse men of being shallow, consider that straight women are more
concerned than men about a potential partner’s status and income.)
importance of partner’s
physical attractiveness
1. it is easy to imagine becoming romantically involved with someone
i initially felt was physically unattractive, as i grew to know her/his
personality. (reverse scored)
2. looks aren’t that important to me. (reverse scored)
3. in the past, i’ve usually initially become romantically interested in
someone largely due to his/her physical characteristics.
4. it is more important to me how nice a potential romantic partner is
than how good looking he/she is. (reverse scored)
5. i wouldn’t consider being romantically involved with someone who
was significantly overweight.
6. it would be hard for me to get involved with someone with a
noticeable skin problem.
7. i like my romantic partner to dress attractively, even if it requires
some effort on her/his part.
8. i would be upset if my partner did not try to maintain her/his
physical appearance.
9. if my partner became much less physically attractive, it would be
difficult for me to stay with her/him.
10. i would be happy if my partner were more sexually attractive than i.



gay masculinity

93

straight men have it easier, in this sense, because women are less hung
up on looks and, therefore, easier to please. gay men are victims of
their own choosiness.
i have known few straight men who openly worried that they
were not good looking enough for a successful dating career. in contrast, i know gay men who do worry, despite the fact that (in my
opinion) they look fine.
it is relatively easy to make one’s body attractive, and many gay
men spend hours a week at the gym. gay men are less likely than
straight men to be obese. (along with “no femmes,” gay advertisements often add “no fatties.”) but sometimes gay men go too far in
the pursuit of thinness. gay men are markedly over represented among
men diagnosed with eating disorders, comprising 20 percent to 50
percent of male cases. (remember, only 2-4 percent of men are gay.).
gay men also tend much more than straight men to pay attention
to fashion, such as designer clothes and trendy shoes. i don’t think that
this stems from the same roots as the desire to be muscular. i doubt
that gay men care all that much whether a potential sex partner is
stylishly dressed, as long as he is otherwise attractive. rather, the interest in fashion appears to be a feminine trait. gay men who are most
interested in fashion tend to have other feminine interests as well.
*********
the humorist, cynthia heimel, wrote that the most important
male sex organ is the eye. this is equally true of gay and straight men,
and in two senses. the first sense is the one just covered, the concern
with physical appearance. the second sense is more overtly sexual.
both gay and straight men enjoy looking at naked people (of their
preferred sex) a lot more than women do.
the questionnaire that asked about interest in visual sexual stimuli
got results that differed markedly between men and women, with men
scoring higher. this is one of the largest sex differences in human
mating psychology (although it is much smaller than the answer to the



94

the man who would be queen

question, “do you prefer to have sex with a man or a woman?”). it
also has a plausible evolutionary basis. a naked woman is potentially a
sexual opportunity, and so straight men should have evolved to seek
them out and to become sexually excited in their presence. in contrast, women have nothing to gain by becoming easily aroused at the
sight of a naked man. otherwise, men would be constantly exposing
themselves to women and preventing women from using their good
cautious judgment.
although difficult to document, consumers of pornography are
certainly disproportionately male. even visual erotica that is targeted
at straight women is disproportionately consumed by men—gay men.
playgirl magazine, which was intended to let women share in the objectification of the nude body, probably has as many gay men as women
readers.
gay men also respond to pornography very much as straight men
do, and very differently from how women do. show men two erotic
video clips: one showing only men and the other showing only
women. if they are straight, they become much more sexually aroused
by the clip showing women than by the one showing men.this is true
whether you measure sexual arousal by asking them (subjective arousal)
or by using a penile plethysmograph, which measures the degree of
penile erection (genital arousal). gay men show exactly the opposite
pattern: they are much more strongly aroused by video clips of men
than by those showing women. men are quite specific about the kind
of erotic categories (i.e., male versus female) they respond to; we call
this pattern “category specificity.” in contrast, women of all sexual
orientations tend to be aroused by video clips showing men and by
those showing women. women have a bisexual pattern of sexual
arousal, both subjectively and genitally.
men’s category-specific pattern of sexual arousal is probably important in developing their sexual orientation. the experience of intense sexual arousal to one sex or the other, but not to both, is a
powerful source of information.



gay masculinity

95

interest in visual sexual stimuli
1. seeing attractive people nude doesn’t sexually arouse me. (reverse
scored)
2. it would be exciting to watch 2 people have sex.
3. seeing attractive people (of my preferred sex) in skimpy clothing
such as lingerie or tight briefs is very sexually exciting to me.
4. i find photographs of attractive naked bodies (of my preferred sex)
sexually exciting.
5. being around a group of attractive naked people (of my preferred
sex) does not sound very sexually arousing to me. (reverse scored)
6. when i meet someone i find attractive, i fantasize about what
they would look like without clothes on.
7. seeing the genitals of an attractive person (of my preferred sex)
would be extremely sexually arousing.
8. seeing my sexual partner undress is a real turn-on.
9. whether or not i approve of them, i find films of attractive people
having sex to be very sexually exciting.
10. when i see someone especially physically attractive, i may follow
them briefly to get another look.
11. when i fantasize about having sex with someone, i try to picture
very vividly in my mind what their body would look like.
12. if i had to choose, i’d rather have a long conversation with someone i’m attracted to than see them naked. (reverse scored)

what about bisexual men? although there are clearly men who
call themselves “bisexual” and who have sex with both men and
women, both scientists and laypeople have long been skeptical that
men with bisexual arousal patterns exist. kurt freund, who invented
penile plethysmography, related that he was never able to find a subset
of men who appeared bisexual in the lab. although their data are less
scientific, gay men share freund’s skepticism. they have a saying:



96

the man who would be queen

“you’re either gay, straight, or lying.” in contrast, many women are
bisexual; perhaps most are, at least in their sexual arousal patterns.
the motivation to seek erotic stimuli, such as strippers or pornography, and the tendency to be sexually aroused by erotica depicting
one sex or the other (but not both) are characteristic of male sexuality.
in these senses, gay men are masculine.
*********
one of the first times that the gay panel spoke to my class, i
offered to take them out for drinks on halsted street. i suggested that
we go to roscoe’s, the only bar i had visited. ben and his friends
looked at each other knowingly and suggested that we go to cocktails
instead. later they told me when they were about 30 years old, they
felt too old to go to roscoe’s. i thought that they meant that the
youngsters at roscoe’s were too unsophisticated to spend time with,
but it became clear that they felt unattractive to the roscoe’s crowd. i
am about 10 years older than they are so i wondered whether the boys
(whom i had considered men when i was there before) at roscoe’s
had been horrified by my presence there.
all the gay men with whom i have ever raised the issue believe
that gay men are extremely youth-conscious. even my 22-year-old
research assistant has started to pine for his days in the sun when he
was desirable to all gay men. the lonely aging queen, with no chance
of a date, much less a relationship, is a common stereotype among gay
men. is this belief justified?
if it is justified, then it reflects another way that gay men are like
straight men—in being most sexually attracted to younger adults.this
contrasts with women, who tend to prefer older mates.this sex difference also has a fairly compelling evolutionary explanation. men should
have evolved to be attracted to women, especially when appraising
potential long-term partners, who are fertile and will remain so for a
long time. because women’s fertility is closely linked to youth, men
should be more attracted to younger than to older women. men’s



gay masculinity

97

fertility does not decline much with age, and in fact, older men have
acquired some of the things that women should value in a mate (including resources and evidence of survival skills). this could explain
why women prefer somewhat older men.
i wrote the questionnaire on age preference to assess preference
for younger versus older partners. in two separate studies gay men
have scored intermediately between straight men and women.that is,

preference for younger partners
1. facial wrinkles in a potential romantic partner would be a real
turn-off to me.
2. i find gray hair to be somewhat sexy in a potential romantic
partner. (reverse scored)
3. i could imagine being romantically and sexually involved with
someone 20 years older than i. (reverse scored)
4. if i had to choose someone other than my current romantic partner
as a long-term romantic partner i would choose someone age ____.
(reverse scored)
5. if i had to choose someone other than my current romantic partner
as a one-time sexual partner i would choose someone age____. (reverse
scored)
6. i am turned off by bodies that show signs of aging (such as sagging
skin or varicose veins).
7. i am most sexually attracted to younger adults (aged 18-25).
8. if someone showed definite physical signs of aging, it would be
difficult for me to be very sexually attracted to them.
9. i find attractive adolescents (aged 16-18) particularly sexy.
10. i would be comfortable having a mate considerably older than i.
(reverse scored)
11. it is hard for me to understand why anyone would have a strong
preference for younger rather than older partners. (reverse scored)



98

the man who would be queen

they are less youth-obsessed than straight men but more so than
straight women; they are a bit closer in this way to straight men than
to straight women. evolutionary psychologist doug kenrick has argued that gay men are identical to straight men in this regard. he has
focused on the actual ages that gay men request in potential partners
(in personals ads and in questions 4 and 5 on my questionnaire) and
finds that these ages are quite similar to those preferred by straight
men.
whether or not gay men are just as youth-centric as straight men
or are slightly less so, it is clear that aging gay men have a harder time
finding desirable sex partners than straight men do. in this sense gay
men have the same experience as straight women. in another way,
however, their predicament is more difficult than that of straight
women. straight women actually prefer slightly older men, and certain
traits such as accomplishments and wealth can make older men more
attractive. (my sense is that, in contrast to women, gay men are not
much more attracted to wealthy and accomplished men, but some are
willing to trade company and sexual access for money and resources.)
straight women seem to value these non-physical traits more than gay
men do. most gay men would prefer partners in their 20s. few women
over 30 have the same preference. therefore, it must be harder for
older gay men to get what they want.
this does not mean that older gay men are doomed to be unhappy any more than it means that older women are. the idea that
aging gay men are lonely and unhappy has been challenged by scientific research, which suggests that even unpartnered gay men tend to
have busy and satisfying social lives. evidently, older gay men do not
focus as much as younger gay men do on sexual gratification. that is
another sense in which they are like straight men.
*********
one main reason many parents express disappointment when they
learn that their son or daughter is homosexual is that they fear they



gay masculinity

99

will not have grandchildren. however, there is a baby boom among
homosexual people these days. among lesbians, that is.
obviously, it is easier for lesbians to become parents than it is for
gay men. lesbians can find sperm donors. at the very least, gay men
must find women willing to donate their bodies for nine months to
carrying a child. still, i think that there is another reason why we
haven’t seen flocks of gay men seeking to become parents. (to be sure,
many gay men became parents in the context of heterosexual marriages, though this seems to be getting less common.) it is because like
straight men, gay men are less interested in children than women are.
when i teach undergraduate introduction to psychology, i sometimes show video clips of infants and children. i watch my students’
faces, and the sex difference is striking.the women make googoo eyes
and have smiles that betray profound desire. although the men also
smile, their smiles are unremarkable. for more objective evidence, consider the items in the questionnaire that i wrote to assess interest in
children. in two studies, gay men scored similarly to straight men, but
lower than straight women (whose scores were similar to those of
baby-booming lesbians). the sex difference was not especially large,
and this is one trait for which i suspect that subjects are not being
completely honest in their responses. after all, who would deny experiencing warm, positive feelings from babies?

interest in children
1. i greatly enjoy spending time with young children.
2. i get a lot of pleasure from holding babies.
3. i would enjoy taking care of a baby for a friend or relative.
4. i daydream about having a baby of my own.
5. often when i see babies, i experience warm, positive feelings.
6. when i think about it hard, i have strong doubts whether the
rewards of raising an infant are worth the work and responsibility. (reverse scored)



100

the man who would be queen

although i am suggesting that neither gay nor straight men have a
female-typical level of nurturance, i am not implying that men don’t
make good parents. most men become devoted to their own children.
and when men are faced with the challenge of raising children on
their own, they usually rise to the task. but on average, men, compared
with women, are less driven to have and raise children. so maybe we’ll
never have a gay male baby boom.
*********
as the gay rights movement has challenged more and more traditional practices and assumptions, some gay writers have begun to challenge the prohibition of gay marriage, partly on the grounds that forbidding gay men to marry forces them into some of the behaviors that
make straight people uncomfortable—most importantly, promiscuity.
writers like andrew sullivan and bruce bawer have argued that gay
male promiscuity and relationship instability are primarily consequences of social stigma and society’s unwillingness to formally recognize gay relationships. undoubtedly, conferring such recognition
would make gay male relationships somewhat more durable. legal ties
are inconvenient to break, and if gay couples could receive the perks
given to heterosexual married couples (e.g., health coverage of
spouses), that would also provide a positive incentive to stay together.
however, discrimination cannot be the whole story. if it were, gay
men and lesbians would have similar behavior patterns, but they do
not. among other differences, lesbians are more likely to be in relationships, place less emphasis on sex in their relationships, have many
fewer sex partners, and are more monogamous.
because of fundamental differences between men and women,
the social organization of gay men’s sexuality will always look quite
different from that of heterosexual men’s. regardless of marital laws
and policies, there will always be fewer gay men who are romantically
attached. gay men will always have many more sex partners than
straight people do. those who are attached will be less sexually mo-



gay masculinity

101

nogamous. and although some gay male relationships will be for life,
these will be many fewer than among heterosexual couples.
social conservatives will view this prediction as tantamount to an
admission of the inferiority of the gay male lifestyle, but it is not that.
nor do i wish to take the radical position that the traditional heterosexual family is sick, outmoded, or otherwise doomed. the aspects of
gay men’s relationships that cause discomfort—the preeminence of
sexuality, the relatively short typical duration, the sexual infidelity—
are indeed destructive in a heterosexual context, but they are much
less so among gay men.there are two main reasons for this difference.
first, gay male couples do not often have children, but heterosexual
couples usually do. the main reason we strive for commitment in our
sexual relationships is because we want to keep families with children
from breaking up. this function is irrelevant to most gay men. it is
relevant to those few who raise children, but they are unlikely ever to
comprise a substantial proportion of gay men.
second, men feel much less psychic conflict than women about
casual sex. that is, most women are not only less interested in casual
sex but actively avoid it, because it makes them feel cheap and used. in
contrast, most men don’t mind being used sexually, and whether or
not there is emotional attachment, sex with an attractive partner is a
self-esteem booster. when straight men try to engage women in relationships based solely on casual sex, they often resort to deception
because they know that their prey want something else. gay men are
much less likely to practice this kind of deception. they are straightforward in their desires.this is the primary reason gay personal ads are
so explicit. does anyone doubt that straight men would specify their
anatomical and sexual preferences if they could get away with it? the
emotional consequences of promiscuity are much less damaging to
gay men than to straight women. i am ignoring the obvious point that
careless promiscuity can have awful health consequences for gay men.
given proper precautions, this issue essentially vanishes.
i suspect that regardless of the progress of gay rights, gay men will



102

the man who would be queen

continue to pursue happiness in ways that differ markedly from the
ways that most straight people do. this will be true even as society
becomes increasingly tolerant of them. both heterosexual and homosexual people will need to be open minded about social practices
common to people of other orientations. they will also need to be
cautious about recommending solutions to life problems that work for
them but that might not translate well to the other camp.



chapter

6

danny’s uncle

d

anny ryan has a gay uncle, mark,
leslie’s brother. when mark came
out to leslie at age 40, she felt that it
was more than a coincidence that danny and he are close relatives.
when their mother revealed that mark had been a feminine boy, leslie
was even more convinced that there was a real connection between
her brother’s and her son’s behaviors.
she doubted it had to do with experience. danny and mark had
not spent much time together. nor had they had similar rearing experiences. the only similarity that immediately came to mind was that
mark and danny had both been shamed by their fathers for behaving
in feminine ways, though she somehow doubted that caused their
femininity to begin with. danny’s behavior seemed to emerge despite
his environment, not because of it.
although she had never liked genetic explanations of behavior,
which she associated with conservatism and racism, leslie had to ad-

103



104

the man who would be queen

mit that it seemed possible. when she talked to mark about it, he said
he believed that homosexuality was inborn. so did most of the other
gay men she knew. she had read about a study purporting to find a
“gay gene.” perhaps in children the gay gene is a “sissy gene,” and both
danny and mark had it.
when leslie ryan came to me to talk about danny, the possible
genetic link was something i felt capable of discussing. i had spent the
better part of my career studying it.
*********
i became a sex researcher in 1986 when i was a graduate student
in clinical psychology at the university of texas. although my advisor
was fond of me, he was ready to see me finish graduate school. he
thought that i was dawdling, and perhaps i was. ignoring the low pay,
graduate school is a fine existence for those who like to learn. but i
was also running up against the dissertation block. i had primarily
studied genetic aspects of schizophrenia and iq, both of which have
spawned enormous literatures. i was feeling that it would be difficult
to make a valuable contribution in either area. the interesting ideas i
came up with had either already been done or were too difficult to
research.
i was taking a graduate course in sexuality and came across an
interesting theory about male homosexuality. this theory was stimulated by findings from studies on rats in which pregnant females are
stressed, for example, by being shocked and confined. the male offspring of these rats tend to show a feminine pattern of sexual behavior.
typically, male rats mount, and female rats lordose, or raise their rear
end when a male tries to mount them. but the males who were prenatally stressed often failed to mount, and under some conditions they
lordosed. now, there is a big difference between what gay men do and
what feminized male rats do. gay men mount plenty. still, it seemed
plausible that in humans prenatal stress might cause male homosexuality. research by a german scientist, gunter dörner, claimed to show



danny’s uncle

105

just that. in his study, the mothers of gay men born during (or right
after) world war ii had had very stressful pregnancies, much more so
than the mothers of heterosexual men born at the same time. for
example, one mother had been forcibly raped, and several had lost
their husbands in the war. one weakness of dörner’s study was that
instead of interviewing mothers directly, he interviewed the gay and
heterosexual men about their mothers’ pregnancies. he says that the
men were supposed to ask their mothers and then report back to him,
but there is no assurance that they did, nor that the mothers were
completely honest with their sons. another potential limitation to his
study is the fact that world war ii germany was a very stressful place.
could the kinds of events that happened to the mothers of gay men in
his study be sufficiently common in modern-day america to be a
common cause of male homosexuality?
i decided to do a methodologically stronger version of dörner’s
study for my dissertation. i had never researched homosexuality before, and i had only a few openly gay friends, so i recruited gay and
straight men from austin using advertisements. (i offered them the
staggering sum of $5 for participating.) i had to ask permission to send
questionnaires to the men’s mothers. however, i assured men that i
wouldn’t mention to mothers that the study had anything to do with
homosexuality. both the men and their mothers were terrifically cooperative, and i eventually got a larger sample than dörner did.
i also had fun meeting my subjects, many of whom were intensely
curious about the science of homosexuality. at first i was a little uncomfortable being a heterosexual man studying gay men. not because
gay men made me uncomfortable, but because of inferences people
often made about why i was doing the research. some gay people
were suspicious about my motives, and questioned what my agenda
was. i quickly learned to emphasize my genuine pro-gay feelings, although it was difficult to make a strong case why my particular study
would advance gay rights. and people tended to assume that if i was
studying male homosexuality, i must be gay. at first, briefly, this both-



106

the man who would be queen

ered me, if for no other reason than the idea that people had false
beliefs about something i considered to be an important aspect of my
identity. i quickly learned that i would have to get over this, and i did.
i now find it amusing and even flattering when people assume i’m
gay—flattering when they say i have a good sense of style. i know
most of the scientists who do substantial research on homosexuality,
and there is certainly a correlation between this research preoccupation and sexual orientation. perhaps half of us are gay, a much higher
percentage than would be expected by chance.
back to my dissertation. i found no support for dörner’s theory
that men become gay due to prenatal stress. mothers of gay and straight
men reported similar memories of stress during their pregnancies.
however, i had asked subjects about their relatives’ orientations, and
here i did find something. gay men said that about 20 percent of their
brothers were also gay, and straight men said that about 1 percent were.
these numbers were similar to those that had recently been obtained
by richard pillard, a boston university psychiatrist. because i had
always been interested in genetics, i was excited by the prospect of
studying the genetics of homosexuality. just after i finished my ph.d.,
i contacted pillard, and we began a long collaboration on this topic.
*********
just because homosexuality runs in families doesn’t mean we can
conclude that there are “gay genes.” catholicism runs in families, but
there is no catholic gene. traits can run in families for either genetic
or environmental reasons. to decide which is more important, we
have to do more sophisticated kinds of studies, including studies of
twins. identical (also called “monozygotic,” meaning “one egg”) twins
are genetically identical, and they provide the most direct test of the
power of genes. if we could separate identical twins at birth and raise
them separately, in different environments, we could see how similarly
they developed. we know that separated identical twins nearly always
have the same eye color, because eye color is virtually completely



danny’s uncle

107

genetic. we know that separated twins can be somewhat different in
their personality, although they are far more similar than unrelated
people would be. what about sexual orientation?
two pairs of separated male identical twins have been written
about in which at least one of the twins was gay. both pairs were
separated early in life and reunited in adulthood. in one of these pairs,
the other twin considered himself bisexual and had had sexual relationships with men, although he was currently involved with a
woman. if gay men are correct in their skepticism that male bisexuality exists, this second twin is probably gay. the other pair was especially fascinating. the twins met, by accident, in a gay bar. they became lovers. (sexual attraction between biological relatives who were
separated early in life and later reunited is much more common than
attraction between relatives who were reared together.) so both pairs
of twins were similar, or as geneticists say “concordant” for homosexual orientation, which suggests that there are gay genes.
although identical twins reared apart provide the ideal genetic
experiment, they are quite rare, and gay identical twins reared apart are
rarer still. unfortunately, mothers of twins are insufficiently dedicated
to scientific progress to routinely give up at least one twin for adoption. this means that we will probably never have a large enough
sample of separated identical twins from which to draw firm conclusions. luckily, we don’t have to have separated twins to make scientific
progress. another kind of twin study, called the classical twin design,
relies on the fact that there are two kinds of twins. fraternal twins
(“dizygotic”—“two eggs”) are not genetically identical, but are only
as similar genetically as ordinary brothers. the logic of the classical
twin study is this: if gay genes exist, then identical twins should be
more similar than fraternal twins in their sexual orientations. gay men’s
identical twins should have a higher rate of homosexuality than their
fraternal twins should.
in 1990, just after i arrived at northwestern university, i advertised
in gay publications across the country, from boston to los angeles:



108

the man who would be queen
are you a twin, or
do you have an adoptive brother?
if you are a gay or bisexual man, and you have a male twin (either identical
or non-identical); or if you have an adoptive or genetically unrelated brother,
we would like to talk to you about participating in a national study of the
development of sexual orientation.

“adoptive brothers” are genetically unrelated males raised together
as brothers. for example, if a family that already had a son had adopted
me, he and i would be adoptive brothers. adoptive brothers are an
interesting comparison group, because they share no genes, only a
rearing environment.
gay twins and adoptive brothers called our office, and we set up
interviews. some we conducted on the phone, and some i conducted
in person on a whirlwind tour through several states. in houston, i
met a parade of gay twins and adoptive brothers in my hotel room. in
san antonio, it was a college dorm room, in st. louis a professor’s
office, in kansas city and dallas friends’ apartments, and in boston a
psychiatrist’s office. it was a grueling month-long trip, but it was also a
fascinating one, because of my subjects, whom i remember vividly.
usually, i met only one twin per pair, although there were exceptions,
such as the kansas city identical pair who entertained me with stories
of their childhood aversion to sports and the dallas pair who convincingly denied childhood interest in dolls but rather had played baseball.
there was the adopted st. louisan who discovered that his biological
father was also gay. there was the haunted houstonite so ashamed of
his homosexuality that he could tell no one, but who suspected that
his heterosexually-married identical twin was also gay. a couple of
heterosexually married subjects did reveal that they were “bisexual”
without their wives knowing. some subjects were very sick from aids.
these subjects were especially happy to be telling their stories—they
shared my belief that the study was a worthy goal. although i was
paying subjects $25 at the time, few were doing it for the money. gay
twins wonder even more often than other people about nature versus
nurture.



danny’s uncle

109

i got quite a bit of information from these men, and from their
brothers, but the main goal was to find out their twins’ (and adoptive
brothers’) sexual orientations. if something genetic is going on, then
identical twins should have the highest rate of also being gay, followed
by fraternal twins, with adoptive brothers bringing up the rear. this is
exactly what i found: 52 percent of identical twins, 24 percent of
fraternal twins, and 11 percent of adoptive brothers were also gay.
these results are consistent with a substantial, but incomplete, genetic
effect. gay genes apparently exist.
could i say anything more about genes for homosexuality, other
than that they exist? i had measured twins’ femininity/masculinity
retrospectively, as childhood memories. i wondered whether feminine gay men might be the products of “nature” and masculine gay
men the results of “nurture.” if this were true, and if “nature” is
equated with “genetic,” then feminine gay men would have more gay
genes than masculine gay men.this should be reflected in the rates of
homosexuality in their identical twins; identical twins of feminine
men should have a higher rate. but i didn’t find this.
i did find something interesting about twins’ femininity, however.
recall that not all gay men remember being feminine boys. some
were conventionally masculine. among the concordant identical twin
pairs—those pairs in which both twins were gay—twins from the
same pair had strikingly similar memories of their own childhood
behavior. in some pairs, both twins recalled being extreme sissies. in
others, both remember being masculine. others were intermediate.
this similarity was limited to the concordant pairs. in the discordant
pairs—one gay and one straight twin—you can’t use the memory of
one to predict the other. the most feminine gay man might have a
straight identical twin who plays football for a living. usually, in fact,
straight twins recalled being much more masculine boys compared
with their gay identical twins.
i also looked at whether having a gay twin has any effect on one’s
own sexual orientation. for example, having an identical twin come



110

the man who would be queen

out to you might make you question your own sexuality. i asked twins
about this, and almost always, twins said that they knew about their
own sexual feelings before they had any inkling about their brothers’.
the study, coauthored by richard pillard, was published in 1991
in archives of general psychiatry, and it received a fair amount of media
attention. i got a flood of letters, including letters of support (primarily from gay people and their families) and hate-mail, primarily from
religious people who hate homosexuality. when i sent news clippings
to my subjects, i received letters back from several families or loved
ones notifying me that the subject had died of aids. i found these
men especially admirable, for maintaining their curiosity in the face of
death.
*********
if sexual orientation were completely genetic, then genetically
identical twins should always have the same sexual orientation, but
clearly they don’t. environment must also matter, but what particular
environmental factors make a gay man? when most people hear “environment,” they automatically think of the social environment, such
as how children are raised or what kind of interpersonal experiences
they have. but to a geneticist “environment” means anything not encoded in dna, and this includes biological factors as well as social
factors: diet, germs, and random biological events might also affect
development. for example, when one identical twin is born with a
major brain defect such as anencephaly (lack of a cerebral cortex, or
outer brain) or microcephaly (a very small cortex), the other twin is
usually normal. only environment can cause identical twins to differ,
but the environmental problem in this case is biological.
what kind of environmental factor can cause genetically identical
twins reared in the same family from birth—often dressed alike and
given the same toys—to differ in their sexual orientations? it is a
fascinating question that we haven’t begun to answer well. one hint
comes from the childhood behavior findings. when identical twins



danny’s uncle

111

differed in their sexual orientation, the gay one tended to recall being
much more feminine than the straight one. this means that the environmental factors that cause the twin differences are there early on,
by childhood. based on other things we know, such as studies of children with cloacal exstrophy (like jason/amanda from chapter 3), i
suspect that these factors operate in the womb. but i don’t know what
they are.
so far, only one environmental factor has been related to male
homosexuality: birth order. psychologist ray blanchard has found that
gay men tend to be later born sons in a series of brothers. in other
words, gay men have greater numbers of older brothers than straight
men do. blanchard has obtained this same result in more than 10
studies, so we can have confidence in it. he theorizes that the “older
brother effect” is a biological one, caused by the mother’s immune
system, which reacts increasingly to a succession of male fetuses. this
immune response affects brain development and, in particular, the
sexual differentiation of the brain. blanchard is in the early stages of
testing the immune hypothesis, so we don’t yet know if it’s true. and
there are numerous firstborn gay men, so obviously birth order can’t
be the whole story.
some social conservatives, especially fundamentalist christians,
have often worried that sexual orientation is affected by societal attitudes. let people believe that it’s okay to be gay, and we’ll have more
gay people. western attitudes toward homosexuality have surely undergone a profound liberalization in the past 50 years. gay people
have become more visible, but there is no good reason to think that
they’re more common. surveys of sexual behavior in the 1990s caused
a stir because the prevalence of homosexuality was much lower than
people had been assuming. (before then, gay activists frequently asserted that ten percent of the population was gay. these surveys suggest that the true figure is more like one to three percent.) i suspect
that there are now many fewer men who fight their homosexual feelings to live heterosexually than there used to be. i don’t think this



112

the man who would be queen

means that the trait of homosexuality has increased, although its expression may have.
another environmental hypothesis that has received some enthusiasm on the political right is the idea that gay people seduce and
recruit. i have never understood how this is plausible. a boy with no
interest in homosexual activity wouldn’t find it pleasant even if he
agreed to it. how is this supposed to turn him gay? but recently, wellknown scientists have presented findings they claimed support this
possibility. their study consisted of interviewing men about their
earliest sexual experiences.they found that gay men were more likely
than straight men to have had homosexual experiences in childhood
and early adolescence. they concluded from this that the homosexual
experiences actually caused the later homosexuality in these cases. i
find this reasoning to be astounding. boys in late childhood and early
adolescence are often capable of sexual feelings. some of those with
homosexual feelings are surely motivated to act on them. and some
get the opportunity to do so. most gay men had their first homosexual feelings long before they ever acted on them.
to contemplate environmental influences on sexual orientation,
consider this thought experiment. suppose your task was to find a gay
man, with the constraint that you can’t ask anyone directly about his
sexual preference.you can ask about their families or attitudes or childhoods, though. the question “were your parents especially tolerant
toward gay people?” would be an ineffective one. the question “were
you a very feminine boy?” would be much better. for men with an
identical twin brother, the question “is your brother gay?” would be
intermediate in effectiveness.
*********
in 1993 biologist dean hamer intrigued both scientists and the
general public with his scientific report that male homosexuality may
be caused by a gene on the x chromosome. hamer’s study consisted
of two components. first, in interviews a sample of gay men reported



danny’s uncle

113

more gay male cousins and uncles on their mothers’ than on their
fathers’ sides. (danny’s uncle mark is on his mother’s side, and so is
consistent with hamer’s findings.) this is the same pattern as x-linked
traits like color blindness and hemophilia. the second finding was
based on genetic linkage, which is rather complicated. hamer studied
pairs of gay brothers. essentially, he reported that gay brothers shared a
piece of the x chromosome, called xq28, more often than they would
be expected to if homosexuality had nothing to do with genetics. he
concluded that xq28 probably contains a gene that affects sexual orientation.
hamer’s results remain intriguing but doubtful.they have not yet
been independently confirmed, and another scientist was unable to
repeat the genetic linkage results. my own lab was unable to repeat his
result that gay men have more gay uncles and cousins on their maternal side. because the results are so important scientifically if they are
true, it is important to do a definitive study. this requires money.
however, even people who agree with the scientific value of this research are ambivalent about funding it if it might lead to socially undesired results. this is a general problem for research on the origins of
sexual orientation. i have often been asked: “do you want to find out
what causes us so you can cure us?”
hamer’s findings provoked special concern. it seemed possible that
we could soon discover a gene for homosexuality. if so, then we could
develop a genetic test. parents then might select against male fetuses
that carried the gene. hamer himself worried about this and urged
that scientists and politicians band together to prevent it. eerily, a play
called twilight of the golds soon opened—it had been written before
hamer’s study was published—whose plot revolved around a pregnant
mother who discovers via genetic testing that she is carrying a gay
child. her brother is gay, but she ends her pregnancy anyway with
tragic results.
i certainly have no motive to change gay people or prevent them
from being born. i suspect that the world would be a happier place if



114

the man who would be queen

we had twice as many gay people as we do. still, there seemed to be
something hysterical about the scenarios and arguments being thrown
about. for example, some of the people raising the specter of “murdering gay babies” were the same people who insisted that abortion is
no one’s business but the woman’s who is considering it. these people
have never tolerated the use of words like “murder” and “babies” in
the abortion debate before. (“fetuses aren’t babies. and abortion isn’t
murder.”) why now?
i discussed the controversy with aaron greenberg, a philosophicallyminded attorney. greenberg’s analysis was provocative, surprising, and
correct. first of all, it is useful to isolate the role of abortion in the
controversy, because abortion itself is so contentious. the issue is not
whether abortion is acceptable. instead, the real question is whether
parental selection in favor of heterosexuality is acceptable.to focus on
this question, we have to assume that whatever means parents will use
to do this are, in themselves, morally acceptable. so, if you have any
problem at all with abortion, assume that pregnant women can guarantee a heterosexual child by, say, taking a pill, or avoiding certain
foods, or even by reading their children certain bedtime stories.
what would make avoiding gay children wrong? one possible
answer is that it would be wrong if it were done due to the parents’
irrational dislike of homosexuality. and in fact, opponents of parental
selection assume that parents selecting against homosexual children
would necessarily have bad motives for doing so. but there are other
reasons besides disliking homosexuality that parents might have for
preferring heterosexual children: the desire to spare their children the
difficulties of societal intolerance of homosexuality, the desire to maximize their chances of having grandchildren, or the desire to have children like themselves in an important area of life: heterosexual marriage and reproduction. no one thinks that christian parents’ desire to
raise their child as a christian is evidence of their hatred of jews or
anyone else. and even if parents prefer a straight child for a bad reason—because they hate gay people—this doesn’t make the act of hav-



danny’s uncle

115

ing a straight child wrong, at least in the absence of any harm caused
by the act. a white racist may prefer vanilla ice cream to chocolate
because vanilla is white, but this doesn’t make ordering vanilla wrong,
because ordering vanilla ice cream doesn’t hurt anyone.
so the next question is whether selecting for heterosexual children would cause any harm. certainly being straight rather than gay
doesn’t harm the child itself. would there be some less direct harm
caused by parental selection for heterosexuality that would make that
selection wrong? one common argument is that allowing parents to
choose heterosexual children would validate or encourage social intolerance of homosexuality. but letting christian parents raise christian children doesn’t validate or encourage anti-semitism. and both
our ability to avoid children with birth defects and our tolerance of
children actually born with defects seem to be at historical high points.
the belief that studying the causes of homosexuality will eventually harm gay people is a highly speculative one. there is no good
reason to dislike or desire to harm gay people, and so it is difficult to
argue that good scientific studies or rational, open discussion will have
that end. in fact, i think that the more we know about homosexuality,
the better attitudes toward gay people will become.
every day gay people suffer real harm—indignities and abuse committed by those with irrational prejudice. we can do a lot more good
by focusing on this problem, and trying to solve it, than by speculating
about the harm that science might cause.
*********
every time i lecture about gay genes, the smart kid in the classroom asks the evolution question: how do gay genes persist if gay
men reproduce less often than straight men? it is an obvious question,
a fine question, an unanswered question. homosexuality might be the
most striking unresolved paradox of human evolution.
an adaptation is a solution to an evolutionary problem. moving
organisms do better if they see, so in response to this need, they evolve



116

the man who would be queen

an eye. of course, scientists and philosophers know that evolution is
not intentional in the way i just implied, but is rather a process of
random variation culled by differential success. our ancestors were
those who survived and reproduced best. the vast majority of our
ancestors were heterosexual. heterosexuality is a paradigmatic evolutionary adaptation.the desire to have sex with members of the opposite sex helps people have sex that might result in offspring.the number of healthy offspring one leaves is perhaps the best indicator of
evolutionary success.
homosexuality is evolutionarily maladaptive. i think this is an
undeniable fact, although gay-positive people (and i am one) tend to
cringe when they hear words like these. “evolutionarily maladaptive”
sounds like an insult, but it isn’t one. lots of traits and behaviors that
are evolutionarily adaptive are less than admirable: jealousy, selfishness,
dishonesty, infidelity, greed, and nepotism are all easy to explain evolutionarily. in contrast, extreme altruism is evolutionarily puzzling. however admirable they are, people who sacrifice their lives for the good
of genetically unrelated others do not pass their genes to future generations. if people like mother teresa were much more common than
they are, evolutionary theorists would be faced with the evolutionary
paradox of saintly self-sacrifice.
some people object that many gay men have sex with women,
too. many even have children. this objection is true but misses the
point. gay men have far less sex with women than straight men do.
this means during most of evolutionary history, before birth control,
they would have had fewer children. today gay men have children at
about 20 percent of the rate that straight men do. this is a massive
disadvantage. even if gay men had 98 percent as many children as
straight men did, gay genes would be eliminated from the gene pool.
yet gay men persist, being at least 1 percent of the male population.
speculating about the persistence of gay genes has become something of a parlor game among evolutionary scientists. they seem to
have an amusing or intriguing idea, write a little paper, and then re-



danny’s uncle

117

turn to pursuits they consider more important. unfortunately, the persistence of gay genes despite their evolutionary disadvantage is too
serious an intellectual problem to be solved this way. the proposed
solutions of evolutionary science’s best and brightest have been rather
lame.
the most common idea suggested by laypeople is that homosexuality is the human species’ solution to overpopulation. scientists
are unanimous that this cannot be correct. even if in the long run we
would be better off as a species with more non-reproducing individuals, genes that make people non-reproductive cannot stay around long.
they will rapidly be overtaken by the greater short-term success of
reproducers. this idea is a non-starter.
there is what i call “the kind gay uncle hypothesis.” this is the
idea that instead of reproducing directly, gay men spread their genes by
investing in their nieces and nephews. perhaps gay men help out with
childcare or give their relatives money. the recognition that we have a
genetic interest in our extended kindred is called inclusive fitness. the
idea that gay men reproduce indirectly, through relatives, has received
favorable attention by the famous evolutionary scientist e. o. wilson
and others, but it is almost certainly incorrect. to begin with, the
numbers are implausible. children share half our genes, but nieces and
nephews share only a quarter. for each foregone child, a gay man
would have to have two extra nieces or nephews. he would have to be
a super uncle. but when we surveyed gay men and their attitudes
toward family members, there was no hint that they were any more
interested than straight men in childcare or investing in their nieces
and nephews. of course, one can always say that it might have been
different a long time ago, but this is the kind of objection that makes
evolutionary theory immune from scientific testing. furthermore, if
the conditions that kept gay genes in the gene pool are no longer true,
then those genes should vanish.
another possibility might be called “the artistic brother hypothesis.” perhaps genes for homosexuality have other effects, and these are



118

the man who would be queen

evolutionarily advantageous in heterosexual people. suppose that like
height, gayness depends on several to many different genes. suppose
that to be gay, a man needs to inherit five gay genes. if he inherits only
four, he is heterosexual with some gay-typical traits. perhaps he is
artistic or has a keen sense of style. if so, then gay genes might persist,
because most of the time genes that can cause homosexuality are in
straight rather than gay people—and in straight people, they are evolutionarily helpful. if this hypothesis were true, then the heterosexual
siblings of gay men would have more children than most people, because they would have more gay genes. there are two problems with
this idea. first, how plausible is it that any trait that a sibling might
inherit would make up for gay men’s greatly diminished reproductive
success? do artists really have more than twice as many offspring as
other people? second, although male homosexuality is associated with
other traits, such as femininity, the association is restricted to the gay
men themselves. that is, the straight siblings of gay men don’t appear
to be more feminine, artistic, or style-conscious than other heterosexual people.
most other ideas offered to explain how homosexuality has persisted have no more going for them than these do. scientists have been
trying to solve the intellectual problem on the cheap, a few hours at a
time, rather than devoting the years it will eventually take to discover
the secret. until they invest the effort and resources that the problem
deserves, homosexuality will remain an evolutionary mystery.
*********
if gay genes exist, how do they work? no matter what causes
homosexual orientation, these causes must work ultimately by impinging on the brain. any psychological or behavioral trait must start
in the brain. the brain is the prime behavioral and psychological organ. other parts of the body might affect behavior, but they do it
through the brain. for example, men make testosterone in their testes,
but these affect sex drive—and everything else they influence—by



danny’s uncle

119

acting on the brain. so if gay genes exist, they affect brain development. in fact, environmental influences also work through the brain.
this would be true even if homosexuality were explicitly learned—
which of course it isn’t.
if there is a sexual orientation center of the brain, then we might
expect it to work this way. if it is masculine, then attraction to women
results. if it is feminine, then attraction to men results. thus, both
straight men and lesbians would be expected to have masculine sexual
orientation areas, and gay men and straight women to have feminine
areas. so one way to proceed would be to find areas of the brain that
differ between straight men and women and then see if they differ
between straight and gay men.
neuroscientist simon levay was thinking similar thoughts in
1989. up to that point, levay had had a distinguished career studying
how the brain allows us to see. but while caring for his longtime male
partner, richard, who eventually died of aids, levay became disenchanted with the vision work, which he felt was not sufficiently well
connected to his personal concerns, such as his identity as a gay man.
he had become less interested in the neuroscience of vision and more
interested in the science of sexual orientation. he saw a paper by
laura allen and colleagues entitled “two sexually dimorphic cell
groups in the human brain” and became excited. the paper claimed
to find two cell groups (nuclei) that were larger in men than in
women: inah-1 and inah-3. this is just the kind of finding that a
neuroscientist interested in sexual orientation hopes for. the hypothalamus has been well established to be involved in sexual behavior
in both humans and other animals. for example, manipulating hormones in rats to make them show either masculine or feminine sexual
patterns seems to work primarily by hormonal effects on the hypothalamus, in particular an area of the brain called the sexually dimorphic nucleus (sdn). the sdn is much larger in normal male rats
than in normal females. males deprived of testosterone during a critical period of development fail to mount like normal males during



120

the man who would be queen

adulthood, and they have small sdns. levay thought that perhaps
either inah-1 or inah-3 might play the same role in humans that
the sdn does in rats.
in 1990 levay began his own study. he was able to obtain the
brains of several gay men, all of whom had died of aids; the brains of
several straight men, most but not all of whom had died of aids
(these were iv drug users); and those of several straight women. in
contrast to allen’s original study, levay found no difference between
straight men and women (or gay men) in the size of inah-1. however, in inah-3 he struck gold. like allen, he found that inah-3
was larger in straight men than in straight women. the finding that
put him on oprah, though, was that gay men’s inah-3s looked like
those of straight women rather than straight men’s.
this study, published in science in 1991, was the first of the “causes
of sexual orientation” studies that made big splashes in the early
1990s, and like the others (including hamer’s and my own), levay’s
received a great deal of scrutiny. one big concern was whether aids
had caused the difference—remember that all his gay men had acquired aids, but some of his heterosexual subjects had not. but levay
showed that this was not the explanation.the size of inah-3 did not
differ between the brains of straight men who died of aids and those
who did not have the disease. (it is aggravating to see this criticism
continue to pop up in critiques of “gay science.”)
a second objection that was often raised was that being gay might
have somehow caused the difference in inah-3, and not vice-versa.
if this were true, then levay’s finding would have no relevance for the
cause of sexual orientation; it would represent an effect of sexual orientation. the problem with this idea is that the hypothalamus appears
to develop early. not a single expert i have ever asked about levay’s
study thought it was plausible that sexual behavior caused the inah3 differences.
the main thing that levay’s study has had against it is that it has
been difficult to repeat. repeating interesting and surprising studies is



danny’s uncle

121

important, because too often they turn out to have been false leads. in
1991 levay was in a good position to try to repeat his own study, but
he elected to stop being a laboratory scientist and to focus on writing
science books for the general public. also, as dean hamer’s example
shows, scientists are less impressed when a scientist repeats his own
results than when an independent research group does it.
levay’s study soon got much more difficult to repeat. it was possible only because of the terrible casualties of the aids epidemic,
which thankfully, have recently slowed considerably. still, one dogged
scientist has managed a reasonable attempt to both repeat the inah3 work and to take it further than levay did. i first met bill byne in
1991, just after richard pillard and i published our male-twin study.
byne was extremely skeptical of levay’s results—in fact he believed
they were probably incorrect. at the time, i thought that byne’s skepticism bordered on paranoia, because the concerns he kept raising
seemed far-fetched. for example, he thought that perhaps aids caused
by homosexual behavior might have different effects on the brain compared with aids caused by iv drug use. this seemed like a stretch to
me—how does hiv know how it gets into someone’s body?
although i was wary of byne, i also recognized his intelligence
and appreciated his tenacity. byne’s work and ability have paid off
recently in a series of important scientific findings. first, he repeated
the finding, yet again, that inah-3 is larger in straight men than in
straight women. even byne thinks that the inah-3 sex difference is
no longer open to question. second, he examined the biochemical
composition of inah-3 and showed that it was similar to the sdn in
rats. this suggests that those structures may have similar functions, or
at least similar evolutionary origins. third, he looked at the brain of a
female rhesus monkey that had been given prenatal androgens and
found that this monkey had a larger inah-3 than other female rhesus
monkeys. (byne did not kill monkeys for his study; their brains were
being stored in a laboratory.) finally, byne has managed to assemble a
sample of brains from straight women and gay and straight men, and



122

the man who would be queen

he has repeated levay’s study. his results were similar to those of levay,
although the difference between straight and gay men was not quite as
large. if i were going to invest a million dollars to look for the causes
of male sexual orientation, i might well invest it in byne and inah-3.
*********
it sometimes seems that there is a news story every other week
linking some kind of biological trait to sexual orientation. i have
seen reports that gay people have different fingerprints, more lefthandedness, different inner ear waves, height, and even penis size. (gay
men allegedly have larger penises.) these findings are related to two
different trends, one of which is good, and one of which is not. the
good trend is that people are interested in sexual orientation, especially its causes, so whenever scientists report a finding, the press is
eager to report it. the bad trend is that scientists and laypeople both
think that there is something more impressive about biological markers—a trait that one can measure with a ruler or a blood test or complicated electronic equipment (i’m serious, there is no better definition of “biological marker”)—than there is about psychological or
behavioral markers. this is a mistake.
let’s take the recent example of 2d:4d. in women, the index
finger (2d, second digit) tends to be similar in length to the fourth
digit (4d). in men, the index finger is more often shorter than the
fourth. the ratio of 2d to 4d, 2d:4d, is larger in women than in men,
on average. relatively speaking, this is a small difference—the effect
size, d, is only about .30, which is the smallest effect size mentioned in
this book. scientists who study 2d:4d argue that the sex difference
depends on prenatal androgens, such as testosterone. my first reaction
is that if 2d:4d is so androgen-dependent, then why is the difference
between men and women so small? but let’s assume that prenatal
androgens are at least one cause of 2d:4d. sexual orientation would
be a sensible trait to examine.
in 2000 a report appeared in the journal nature that lesbians had



danny’s uncle

123

masculine 2d:4d ratios. there was no clear finding for gay men. the
chief author of the paper, marc breedlove, is a well-known and capable
scientist.the report made all the papers and jay leno’s monologue. as
to be expected, given the modest sex difference, differences between
lesbians and straight women were small, detectable primarily because
the authors had collected a very large sample at a gay pride parade.
recently, richard lippa collected finger length data from even
more subjects at gay pride parades, and his findings disagree with
breedlove’s. lippa didn’t find any differences between straight women
and lesbians, but he did find a difference between gay and straight
men. as we would expect, gay men had a feminine pattern (larger
2d:4d). because lippa’s sample was much larger, and because his
analysis was somewhat more sophisticated (for example, he analyzed
results separately by ethnic group, because there are ethnic differences
in 2d:4d), i think it is somewhat more likely that his results will stand
the test of time. conflicting findings are common in science, and eventually we will know whose findings are correct, if either is. but in any
case, i don’t think that studies of 2d:4d will reveal nearly as much
about the causes of homosexual orientation as looking carefully at
boys like danny ryan will. and let me make clear that i think we
should be looking at danny’s behavior, and not his fingers.
nobody ever gave danny ryan a dress before he asked for one,
and he was punished much more than rewarded for his gender nonconformity. if he grows up to be a gay man, as i expect he will, it will
be despite the most obvious influences in his social environment, not
because of them. in the short term, danny will receive no more encouragement from others to become gay than he did to wear dresses.
behavior that emerges with no encouragement, and despite opposition, is the sine qua non of innateness. boys like danny are poster
children for biological influences on gender and sexuality, and this is
true whether or not we measure a single biological marker.



chapter

7

is homosexuality a
recent invention?

w

hat about the greeks? this is the
other question (with the evolutionary one) that is asked nearly every
time i talk about homosexuality. it would be asked even more often,
except that a lot of people who believe that they already know the
answer to the question don’t show up to my lecture. these people
think that i am wasting my time trying to learn about the nature of
homosexuality. they think that homosexuality has no nature. to
them, homosexuality is a “social construction.”
“social constructionism” (or “social constructivism”) is a term
that might be familiar to anyone who has taken a humanities course at
an american or european university since 1990, but it might otherwise sound odd. it is difficult to explain social constructionism in a
way that satisfies social constructionists.they think this is because they
are profound and people like me simplistic. i think it is because they
aren’t very clear, and to the extent they are clear, they are incorrect.

124



is homosexuality a recent invention?

125

regardless, this is an important controversy, and i will try to do it
justice.
across history and culture the social constructionists believe they
see tremendous variation in both the prevalence and form of homosexual behavior. so much so that to talk about sexual orientation as if
it might be a fundamental part of human nature is surely mistaken.
they think that whether one prefers sex with men or women is more
like whether one likes or dislikes opera than whether one has a penis
or a vagina. searching for scientific laws that explain who likes and
dislikes opera, without paying much attention to the culture that one
is in, is surely an absurd pursuit. social constructionists think that those
of us who study the origins of sexual orientation are, likewise, spinning our wheels.
some of the cultural and historical phenomena that social constructionists have focused on include:
• ancient greece, where it was common for men to form sexual
relationships with adolescent boys and where most men were bisexual
(according to the constructionists).
• the romans, who were tolerant of male homosexual behavior, provided that normal free men were penetrating male slaves and
prostitutes.
• fifteenth-century florence, where nearly half of all men came
to the attention of the authorities for committing sodomy.
• the sambia, a tribe in new guinea, in which boys live for
years only with males and practice oral sex with men.
• british public schools, all-male boarding schools, which were
famous for their high levels of homosexual activity.
what do these examples have in common? first, these cultures
had much higher rates of homosexual behavior between men than
exist now in the west. second, the constructionists assert that none of
these cultures thought about sexual orientation the way we do. indeed, the social constructionists claim that the idea that people vary in



126

the man who would be queen

whether they prefer to have sex with men or women began recently,
during the nineteenth century. before then, there were only homosexual and heterosexual acts, not homosexual and heterosexual people.
perhaps the most surprising claim the social constructionists make is
that the way that cultures think about sex actually influences the sexual
feelings of their members. in cultures that don’t classify heterosexuals
and homosexuals, men are capable of sexual attraction to both men
and women.
social constructionists call those who disagree with their major
points “essentialists.” essentialists believe that sexual orientation is an
essential part of human nature. i am an essentialist.
*********
how can we know anything about the sex lives of greeks who
lived 2,500 years ago? it is difficult enough to know about the sex lives
of americans today, even though we can discuss the question with at
least some current inhabitants of our culture. furthermore, social scientists have completed several large and ambitious surveys on this topic
during the past decade. these studies required millions of dollars and
thousands of subjects.typically, the researchers identified a representative sample (of americans, for example), and telephoned them, asking
them to participate in a sexuality survey. a standard interview was
used that included questions such as: “how many same-sex partners
have you had during your lifetime?” “do you consider yourself heterosexual, bisexual, or homosexual?”“are you attracted more to members of your own sex or to members of the opposite sex?” interviews
were conducted in private, and subjects were assured that their answers would remain secret. we know exactly what percentage of
people declined to participate, and some studies even tried to get at
the reasons for non-participation. still, these studies did not eliminate
all uncertainty about american sex lives. there remains controversy
about how frequently people commit adultery, for example, and the
estimated prevalence of homosexuality varies widely, from less than



is homosexuality a recent invention?

127

1 percent to more than 4 percent.this is a wide range, with the higher
estimate four times the lower one. the fact that we can’t get complete
accuracy is not all that surprising, given the sensitivity of the topic.
historians have a much more difficult task. they can’t go back in
time to ask people what they feel and think. they have no access to
surveys. rather, they get remnants and pieces, from art, law, myth,
fiction, graffiti, history, philosophy, politics, and poetry. they can make
educated guesses. to the extent that different sources of information
all convey a similar picture, we can be more confident. still, there is no
reasonable dispute that we can be much less certain of facts about
ancient greek sex lives than we can about the facts of american sex
lives in our own time. historians’ work is important, but it just can’t be
nearly as conclusive as even contemporary social science can be. the
best historians are appropriately careful about the conclusions they
draw. as one prominent historian put it: “a scene on a vase may not
tell us any more about a middling athenian than a wedgwood china
pattern tells us about a victorian hackney driver.”
here is what we know for sure. in parts of ancient greece, including athens during the fifth century, b.c.e., some men formed homosexual relationships of a different type than that which commonly
exists now in the west. typically, these relationships involved an established older man and a younger adolescent boy, the younger partner
(the “eromenos”) being near the age of first growing a beard, the older
(“erastes”) often an older (bearded or lightly bearded) adolescent or
unmarried young man. the older partner could also be a married
man—marriage was largely non-companionate in greece. the relationship was cemented by the older partner giving the younger a gift,
often shown on vases as a cockerel (a young rooster). these relationships were sexual ones.the main sexual activity depicted on vases was
intercrural intercourse, in which the older partner inserted his penis
between the thighs (but not in the anus) of the younger partner, thrusting until ejaculation. nobody on either side of the social constructionist debate denies that this practice existed.



128

the man who would be queen

but the most important social constructionists’ claims have not
withstood close scrutiny of historians and classical scholars. not surprisingly, careful scholars admit that there is much we don’t know
about the sexual practices and desires of the ancient greeks. one
problem is that ancient greece included many diverse cultures—
sparta, athens, crete, among others—and several centuries. to make
any generalizations about “the greeks” is risky. what we do know
contradicts the social constructionist account. for example, far from
being widespread, “pederastic” relationships between men and adolescent boys were viewed as a decadent practice of the aristocracy. parents often tried to prevent their sons from entering these relationships
(as the younger member). if money changed hands, the younger member could lose citizenship. the greeks were especially intolerant of
receptive anal intercourse, which they viewed as an abomination
against nature.
more important, the record we have shows that some greeks recognized that at least some people had a homosexual preference. for
example, aristophanes portrayed agathon as a feminine man who enjoyed receptive anal sex. in plato’s symposium, aristophanes related a
creation myth in which originally there were three sexes: men, women,
and a combination of the two. zeus cut each sex in half, and from that
point, each person was driven to find the missing half. thus, the man
created by cleaving a complete man in half was homosexual, whereas
heterosexual men and women were created by cutting the original
androgyne in half. the historian john boswell documented the existence of obviously heterosexual or homosexual characters in greek
literature.
the romans, just a few centuries later, had a word to describe
feminine, exclusively homosexual men: cinaedi. these men were so
common that the apostle paul offered homosexual behavior as his
chief example of the capital’s decadence. they appear to have shared a
flamboyant style of distinctive dress, hairstyles, and mannerisms, as well
as regular cruising grounds, and typical occupations.to me, they sound
a lot like the guys on halsted street.



is homosexuality a recent invention?

129

*********
fifteenth-century florence had a reputation as a bastion of
“sodomites.” (this is why “florenzer” in german meant “sodomite.”)
in 1432 the city created a commission, “the office of the night,” to
solicit and investigate charges of sodomy. for example, boxes were
placed so that people could make anonymous accusations. the population of florence was 40,000, and the office of the night lasted 70
years. during that time, 17,000 men were implicated. assuming there
were 20,000 men in florence at any one time, and that 70 years means
two complete generations, 17,000 is nearly half of the men of florence during that time. florentines generally accepted sodomy as a
common misdemeanor, to be punished with a fine, rather than as a
serious crime. fewer than 3,000 of the 17,000 accused men were
convicted.
the primary historian of homosexuality in fifteenth-century florence, michael rocke, emphasized the social constructionist line, that
these men were not considered “homosexual.” however, at least some
clearly were. one man confessed to his acquaintance, machiavelli, that
had his father “known my natural inclinations and ways, [he] would
never have tied me to a wife.” there was a core minority of “notorious sodomites” who committed a disproportionate number of offenses.
and accused men were more likely to be bachelors than married men.
all this argues that some men preferred men to women.
florence seems to be a special case at that historical period. other
similar-sized cities in the region don’t seem to have had its high rate of
homosexual behavior. there is some evidence that some men migrated to florence precisely because of its reputation, making it a kind
of renaissance-era san francisco. thus, it is unclear to what extent
the beliefs and culture of florence influenced the sexual desires of its
inhabitants. perhaps the influence was primarily the other way around.
*********



130

the man who would be queen

the sambia live in an isolated forested area on the edge of the
new guinea highlands. sometime between ages 7 and 10, sambian
boys are taken from their mothers and made to live in an all-male
house in their village. they will live there for the next 10 years, learning sambian ideology and sambian practice.
the ideology stresses the importance of semen, which is considered necessary for male virility and health. in contrast, women’s essential substance is menstrual blood, which is potentially poisonous to
men. women are born with the ability to secrete menstrual blood,
although they don’t do so until adolescence. in contrast, males are
born without semen, which they will need in order to maintain health,
risk sex with women, impregnate women, and even help provide
women with milk.
but how do males get their semen, if they have none at birth?
they get their semen by sucking it out of older males. older boys
teach them how to do this. although the older boys obviously get
enough sexual pleasure to enable them to ejaculate, everyone considers them to be doing a favor by donating their semen to the younger
boys. the younger boys who fellate the older boys don’t usually say
that they’re sexually aroused.the younger boys suck semen from older
boys a few times a week for several years (remember, they are still
segregated from their families and all women) until they undergo puberty. this event “shows” them the value of eating semen. soon, the
mature boys will begin supervising the initiation ritual of a new crop
of 7-10-year-old boys, now as the older, fellated, partner.
in a few more years, in their late teens or early twenties, these
now young men are ready to be married to women. at the first stage
of marriage, they don’t have vaginal intercourse, but instead, have oral
sex with their wives. they also continue to donate semen to younger
boys. soon, however, the men stop having homosexual encounters
with younger boys and begin having vaginal intercourse with their
wives. most men make this transition, from completely homosexual
behavior during adolescence to completely heterosexual behavior



is homosexuality a recent invention?

131

during adulthood, with no problem. a small minority of men remain
bachelors and seems to prefer the boys. the other sambia ridicule
these men and think they are odd. we might call them “gay.”
*********
at a scientific conference i was talking to a british colleague about
homosexuality. my impression of him was of a strict heterosexual, but
he revealed that he had had numerous homosexual encounters as an
adolescent at public boarding school. (in britain,“public school” refers
to the fancy kind of school that americans call “private school.”) this
activity consisted of mutual masturbation, and he found it exciting at
the time. he puzzled over his transition from those days to now, in
which he found the idea of sexual contact with other men “disgusting.”
his experience reveals three facts that i think might be important.
first, his homosexual experiences occurred in a context of female
unavailability. the same was also obviously true of the sambia, but it
was also true to a somewhat lesser extent of the ancient greeks, who
sequestered women until marriage. men seem more likely to resort to
homosexual behavior if they have no heterosexual outlets.
second, his enjoyment of homosexual behavior was evidently
normal for him; his later disapproval required him to learn that
homosexuality is disgusting. (he does not, however, believe he could
have enjoyed fellatio or anal sex even at that time.) perhaps, then,
many if not most men could enjoy homosexual encounters of some
form if they hadn’t learned to be disgusted by them.
third, there might be something to the idea that young or adolescent boys are especially attractive as homosexual partners for males.
they are relatively hairless and less muscular; in these senses they look
like women.
none of these possibilities destroys the idea that sexual orientation is a meaningful concept. to say that many men who don’t have
access to women will have sex with men is not to say that this is their
first choice. that a high percentage of men might enjoy homosexual



132

the man who would be queen

sex if they were not socialized otherwise does not mean that they
wouldn’t prefer heterosexual encounters given the choice. to say that
men find relatively immature males more attractive than mature, bulky,
hairy men is not to say that they prefer young males to females.
sexual encounters in prison are illuminating. men in prison generally have no heterosexual outlet, except through fantasy. it is remarkable that a high percentage of men who have always been heterosexual
outside of prison engage in homosexual sex in prison instead of confining sexual activity to masturbation. evidently, there is something
pleasurable about being with another person that is more rewarding to
some men than merely rubbing their own penises. many, if not most,
incarcerated men have the capacity to enjoy homosexual behavior.
the most favored partners are the young, weak, and feminine. although sociologists have tended to interpret this in terms of power
relations—stronger inmates want to dominate weaker ones—it seems
more likely to me that this is because the young, weak, and feminine
make better female substitutes. there is one type of prisoner that prefers the big, masculine men as partners.this is the “queenie” prisoner,
the feminine gay man, who receives a good deal of sexual attention
from other prisoners.
when they leave prison, men who had been heterosexual before
entering usually return to a strictly heterosexual lifestyle. their prison
encounters did not indicate that their sexual preference had changed.
the men were simply doing the best they could, given constraints. it
would be important to know what these men were thinking when
they were having their penises sucked by other men, for example.
were they thinking of the men sucking their penises, or were they
imagining their girlfriends at home? the former possibility would
indicate more flexibility of true sexual preference than the latter.
the social constructionists have offered greek pederasty, the
sambia, and the british boarding school experience as proof that men
are innately bisexual. although there may be something to their argument, it can’t get them as far as they’d like to go. they can’t explain



is homosexuality a recent invention?

133

the contemporary western gay man. all these men grew up in a culture that gave homosexuality an inferior status compared with heterosexuality. many of them were at some point highly motivated to be
straight, and some tried—through prayer, therapy, or marriage. if bisexuality—meaning indifference to the choice between male and female sex partners—were in them, then it should have been easy for
them to conform to the heterosexual norm. but it wasn’t.
recall gay men’s skepticism about men who claim to be bisexual.
(“you’re either gay, straight, or lying.”) my lab has been trying to find
bisexual men by studying men’s erections to male versus female sexual
stimuli. a truly bisexual man should become substantially aroused to
both sexes. out of approximately 30 men who claim to be bisexual,
only 2 have sexual arousal patterns that might be classified as bisexual.
most of the rest had a gay arousal pattern; a few had a straight pattern.
in the right culture, most men might be capable of some sexual
arousal to both sexes. however, this doesn’t mean that they wouldn’t
have stronger feelings for one sex or the other. most would probably
have much stronger feelings for women, and a minority would have
much stronger feelings for men.
*********
social constructionists have made a positive contribution to understanding sexual orientation by their insistence that we attend to
different cultures rather than assuming everyone is like us. there are
interesting differences between the types of homosexual behaviors and
relationships across cultures, and we don’t yet understand them fully.
however, the contention that homosexual orientation (as distinct from
homosexual behavior) is a recent and local phenomenon is not supported by the evidence. men who look awfully similar to the men i’ve
been talking about in previous chapters seem to have existed through
the ages and in vastly different cultures. social constructionists’ refusal
or inability to see this suggests that they are trying to keep their eyes
closed.



134

the man who would be queen

*********
transgender homosexuality occurs when one man takes on a feminine role, often dressing as a woman and taking a woman’s name, and
has sex with masculine men. transgender homosexuality is probably
the most common form of homosexuality found across cultures. it
occurs in the west (although it is much less common than egalitarian
homosexual relationships), and has been documented in a number of
other societies. one of the most extensively studied transgender
homosexuality traditions has been that of the berdache, among some
native american tribes. the berdache tradition involved males who
typically were identified in childhood by their femininity and placed
in a role that would allow them both spiritual leadership and sex and
marriage with men. as one observer said about the berdache among the
crow of the plains in 1903: “i was told that when very young, those
persons manifested a decided preference for things pertaining to female
duties.”
the hijras of india are a group of very feminine men who worship
the mother goddess, bahuchara mata. most of the men are homosexual. many of the men undergo an operation in which their penis
and testes are removed.this surgery is illegal and can be quite dangerous; it is performed by a member of the group, or sometimes by a
cooperative surgeon. the hijras are paid to perform at weddings and
the celebration of male births, but this service is actually more extorted by the hijras than solicited by families. if a family does not pay,
the hijras make trouble, perhaps even flashing their mutilated genitalia.
many of the hijras also engage in male prostitution.
when he visited tahiti, captain bligh (commander of the bounty)
noted that the mahu participated in the same ceremonies as women
did. at first, their feminine behavior and speech led him to believe
that they were castrated, but he learned otherwise. he observed with
disgust the practice of men rubbing their penises between the mahus’
thighs. the contemporary mahu fellate the men they have sex with,
who do not return the favor.



is homosexuality a recent invention?

135

the xanith perform women’s chores in highly sex-segregated
oman and are classed with women for many social purposes. their
clothing and physical presentation is a mixture of male and female,
perhaps because they are denied by law the right to dress as women.
their attractiveness is judged by female standards of beauty (white
skin, large eyes, and full cheeks, for example), and they serve as homosexual prostitutes.
evidence for the cross-cultural ubiquity of transsexuals comes
from newspapers as well. thailand holds an annual transsexual beauty
pageant. (the most recent winner, 22-year-old thanaporn
wongprasert of bangkok, said she would spend the $1,300 prize
money to make herself more beautiful.) a recent article in the bangkok
post discussed thai television’s excess of drag queens: “tune into any
daytime television channel these days, and before long you may well
see a character who is male, but whose behavior is a wild parody of
female mannerisms: exaggerated ladylike daintiness, drag-queen hijinx,
campy verbal acrobatics—they’re all in the repertoire. no woman
could hope to compete with their version of over-the-top superfemininity. and evidently audiences love it. male cross-dressers are
now familiar figures, guaranteed to bring an instant laugh in tv comedies, dramas, talk and game shows, commercials, and even films.”
from tonga: thirteen contestants entered the annual miss galaxy
transgendered beauty pageant july 9-11 in nuku’alofa, capital of the
south pacific nation of tonga. in the end, natasha pressland, 18,
emerged victorious. her hobbies are “dancing, praying, and meeting
people.” she plans to become a flight attendant.
the sociologist fred whitam has spent much of his career studying homosexuality in non-western cultures. based on his observations
in brazil, guatemala, the philippines, indonesia, thailand, and the
united states, whitam is convinced that drag queens and transgender
homosexuals exist in all societies. furthermore, whitam has found
that within homosexual communities, the more important distinction
is between conventionally masculine gay men and the very feminine



136

the man who would be queen

drag queens and transsexuals. despite particular cross-cultural wrinkles,
whitam has recognized several cross-culturally universal characteristics among the latter. invariably, drag queens and transsexuals were
highly feminine boys who exhibited low levels of athletic interest and
high levels of interest in activities considered feminine. as adults, they
use female pronouns to talk about themselves, and they adopt female
names. they tend to dress in a theatrical, glamorous manner. all drag
queen and transsexual communities of any size produce conspicuous
entertainment forms, and the most appealing occupations to the members are entertainment-related (primarily singing, dancing, and acting).transgender homosexual men often work in occupations that are
viewed as traditionally female or “gay,” such as prostitution, hair styling, sewing, housekeeping, or manicuring. they have high levels of
interest in having sex with men, and their partners tend to be heterosexual or bisexual, rather than gay men.
whitam believes that one of the most culturally variable phenomena is the willingness of straight men to have sex with very feminine gay men. in america, this appears to be a rare practice. however,
in some other cultures whitam says it is common. for example, in the
philippines many straight adolescent males have their first sexual contact with bayot, or members of the transgendered gay male tradition
there. sexual liaisons with bayot are thought of as adolescent peccadilloes no worse than smoking and drinking. they are certainly more
acceptable, in certain respects, than spoiling the virginity of “nice
girls.”
whitam’s observations are necessarily limited to contemporary
societies, although it is unlikely that any of the transsexual and drag
queen subcultures has arisen recently (due, for example, to the international televising of daytime talk shows).the cross-cultural regularity
of homosexual transsexuals and drag queens is highly suggestive of
some fundamental biological influence that transcends culture.
*********



is homosexuality a recent invention?

137

egalitarian homosexuality is the type of homosexual relationship
most common in the contemporary west. egalitarian homosexuality
occurs when two individuals of similar age and class form a homosexual relationship. for some reason, during the second half of the
twentieth century, this has become the predominant form of homosexuality in the west, while transgender homosexuality has become
rare. however, these two forms of homosexuality are not as different
as they appear.
take danny ryan. chances are that when he grows up he will be
a gay man practicing egalitarian homosexuality. there is a smaller
chance that he will become a woman, and if he does, his sex life will
be of the transgender type. if danny had been born among the crow
native americans during the 1800s, he would almost certainly have
been made a member of the berdache. egalitarian and transgender homosexuality are similar because they contain some similar people.
transgender homosexuality is rare in western culture, but this is not
because few men have the potential to be transgender homosexuals
under the right circumstances. my research, which demonstrates a
large degree of femininity among gay men, suggests rather that the
western gay community has plenty of men who would have been
candidates for transgender homosexuality in cultures where this was
the main type of homosexuality.
the main difference between transgender and egalitarian homosexuality is that in transgender homosexuality, only one of the partners
is truly gay. the partner in the feminine role is gay because “she”
wants men. furthermore “she” wants men who are masculine. what
about these masculine men? although they are in some sense engaged
in homosexual behavior, because they are having sex with someone
born a man, they do not view the transgendered partner as a man.
some view “her” as a woman; others as a member of a third gender,
neither male nor female. the masculine partners prefer either women
or males imitating women.
in contrast, both the members of an egalitarian homosexual rela-



138

the man who would be queen

tionship are gay. both want masculine men. neither partner in this
kind of relationship would be excited to have a male partner pretending to be a female. even if one of the partners would actually enjoy
taking the feminine role—taking a female name, wearing a dress, pretending to be a woman, basically becoming a full-time drag queen—
he would refrain in order to make his partner happy. if a gay man
wants to attract straight men, he should imitate a woman. if he wants
to attract gay men, he must stay a man.
i think it is likely that many of the men on halsted street could
have been members of the berdache or the hijras. some may actually
have been happier if they had been born into a society in which the
transgendered role was more common. if danny ryan had been born
into such a society, he would not have to throw off or hide his femininity. it would be a necessary part of his role. some cultures with a
prominent tradition of transgender homosexuality even help feminine
boys into the transgendered role. but in the contemporary west, this
doesn’t happen. here, danny must learn to act more like a boy, and he
must become a man.
despite these pressures, a few males resist. they are reluctant to
give up their ambition to become women, and they decide to pursue
their dream. the rest of the book is about them.



part iii
women who once
were boys





i

t is 2 am sunday night (actually
monday morning) at crobar, and i
am tired. i have had only limited
success tonight recruiting research subjects for our study of drag queens
and transsexuals and am cruising the huge club one more time before
leaving. the crobar crowd is on a different schedule than i; the place
is just reaching its peak intensity. i pass a tall, attractive, black woman,
who sees me staring at her, and somehow she understands what’s on
my mind. “no, i’m real,” she laughs good-naturedly. (i am thankful
that none of the dozen or so genetic females we mistakenly approached
during the course of this study ever became hurt or angry. i wonder if
they understood that the implication that we thought they might be
transsexual was not an insult. many of the transsexuals we interviewed
in the course of the study were more attractive than the average genetic female.)
i start upstairs to get the panoramic view and i see kim for the
first time, on the stairs, dancing, posing. she is spectacular, exotic (i
find out later that she is from belize), and sexy. her body is incredibly
curvaceous, which is a clue that it may not be natural. and i notice a
very subtle and not-unattractive angularity of the face, which is also
not clearly diagnostic on this tall siren. it is difficult to avoid viewing
kim from two perspectives: as a researcher but also as a single, heterosexual man. as i contemplate approaching her, i am influenced by
considerations from each perspective. i have this strong intuition that i
am correct about her, but if i am not, i might have the unpleasant
experience of simultaneously insulting, and being rejected by, a beautiful woman.
as i waver, i notice her companion, an attractive, blonde-haired,
blue-eyed man whose body, amply displayed in a tight tank top, is the
male analogue of kim’s—he has a huge chest (hairless of course) and
bulging biceps. they are a beautiful couple, or at least a couple of
beautiful people. they dance together, occasionally smiling at each
other, but they do not dance closely or in a way that betrays the sexual
141



142

the man who would be queen

desire that virtually anyone would feel toward at least one of them. i
remind myself that it is sunday night “glee club”—gay night at
crobar. what would a gorgeous heterosexual couple be doing at
crobar tonight at 2 am? in fact, however, this is a very trendy setting
even among heterosexuals, particularly if one is unconventional and
open-minded. (dennis rodman has been a regular.) i cannot decide
whether kim is transsexual, and in a tribute to her beauty, i decide for
now not to approach her. if she is transsexual, i will have other chances
to meet her, and i will probably also have the opportunity to find out
from others without asking her directly. so i leave.
*********
based on the frequency of their appearance on american talk
shows—“beautiful women who used to be men,” “my wife used to
be a man,” “my husband is a woman,” “my husband has become a
woman”—transsexuals might appear to constitute a sizeable minority.
they do not. fewer than 1 in 20,000 persons is transsexual. most of
us do not personally know a transsexual, although many of us have
had the experience of wondering if a particular woman we have seen
is actually a man, and most of us who have been to even a few gay bars
have seen one. there are also transsexuals who work as waitresses,
hairdressers, receptionists, strippers, and prostitutes, as well as in many
other occupations, whom we might meet incidentally, without even
questioning whether they might have once lived as men.
transsexuals appear frequently on daytime talk shows not because
they are common, but because people find them fascinating, and
because talk shows’ continued existence depends on their catering to
people’s fascinations, no matter how elevating (or not) those may be. i
have been asked to talk to respectable media as an expert on
transsexualism regarding two cases: a race car driver who got a sex
change, and a chicago area teacher who was living as a man in the
spring and assumed a female identity in the fall. time magazine recently
ran a story about the “transgendered,” and movies in recent years such
as priscilla: queen of the desert, the crying game, ed wood, silence of the



women who once were boys

143

lambs, and midnight in the garden of good and evil, among others, have
featured transsexuals and their like. transsexuals are hot. i have discerned a few main themes in transsexual mania, which include:
“what is it like to feel that you were born the wrong sex?”
“what would it be like to become involved, knowingly or not, in a
romantic relationship with a transsexual?”
“isn’t it amazing how convincing a woman she makes?
alternatively (but not in the same show),
“isn’t it strange to see that male-looking person proclaiming his inner femininity, dressed like a woman, and evidently somewhere in the process of
obtaining a sex change, when he used to be married and work in a bank?”
“what is involved in getting a sex change?”
“do transsexuals ever regret their surgery?”
these are, indeed, all fascinating questions. and if they are less
practically important than the question of how to reduce the national
debt, some issues related to transsexualism do touch on fundamental
issues about human nature. unfortunately, the typical format in which
these are discussed is designed to provoke rather than to illuminate.
moreover, it is not surprising that the typical television viewer has
only superficial knowledge about transsexuals when many “experts”
who make their livings working with them do not understand transsexuals very well.
most people—even those who have never met a transsexual—
know the standard story of men who want to be women: “since i can
remember, i have always felt as if i were a member of the other sex. i
have felt like a freak with this body and detest my penis. i must get sex
reassignment surgery (a “sex change operation”) in order to match my
external body with my internal mind.” but the truth is much more
interesting than the standard story.



144

the man who would be queen

*********
terminology is an important source of confusion. “transsexualism” has many connotations, including “sex change,” “trapped in
the wrong body,” “femininity” (in genetic males) or “masculinity” (in
genetic females), and “cross-dressing.” try to forget the connotations.
all i mean by “transsexualism” is the desire to become a member of
the opposite sex. an adult with transsexualism is a “transsexual.” these
definitions say nothing about the motivation, appearance, or subsequent actions of the transsexual. they do not imply that the transsexual feels trapped in the wrong body, or that the transsexual even
ultimately seeks sex reassignment.
the definitions also allow different degrees of transsexualism. i
have no desire to become a woman, and so i am not at all transsexual.
but there is a range of transsexualism among people who do have
such desires. there are people who would like to change sex if they
could try it out for a while and change back if they chose. (i do not
mean to include people who have whimsical thoughts about this.
only serious thoughts.) some would change sex permanently if they
did not have to give up important aspects of their lives (for example,
their children) to do so. others have no ambivalence, and might dedicate their lives to changing their sex to the point of apparent obsession, losing families, friends, and jobs in the process. all these people i
have described are at least a little transsexual, but the latter are more
transsexual than the former. “transsexual” is not an either-or label.
even if we were to restrict the use of that word to those who take
medical steps to change their sex, there would still be considerable
variability. some transsexuals merely undergo electrolysis; others take
hormones; others get breast implants; and of course, others get an
operation to simulate the genitalia of the other sex.
despite this variability, it is possible to get a handle on the psychology of male-to-female transsexualism. you just have to meet the
right people—starting with some transsexuals, themselves.



chapter

8

terese and cher

o

ne way that the standard transsexual
story is wrong is in its singularity.
two different types of men change
their sex. to anyone who examines them closely, they are quite dissimilar, in their histories, their motivations, their degree of femininity,
their demographics, and even the way they look.we know little about
the causes of either type of transsexualism (though we have some
good hunches about one type). but i am certain that when we finally
do understand, the causes of the two types will be completely different.
to anyone who has seen members of both types and who has
learned to ask the right kinds of questions, it is easy to tell them apart.
yet the difference has eluded virtually everyone who cares about transsexuals: talk show hosts, journalists, most people who evaluate and
treat them, and even most academics who have studied them. one
reason is that the superficial similarity of the two types is so striking—
both are men, usually dressed and attempting to act like women, who

145



146

the man who would be queen

want to replace their penises with vaginas—that it prevents us from
noticing more subtle, though also more fundamental, differences. another reason is that the two types of transsexuals rarely show up side
by side, where they would be easily distinguishable. in the united
states in the third millennium, they do not use the same “gender
clinics,” and although they often associate with other transsexuals, this
is nearly always with their own type. the most interesting reason why
most people do not realize that there are two types of transsexuals is
that members of one type sometimes misrepresent themselves as members of the other. i will get more specific later, but for now, it is enough
to say that they are often silent about their true motivation and instead
tell stories about themselves that are misleading and, in important respects, false.
the two types of transsexuals who begin life as males are called
homosexual and autogynephilic. once understood, these names are appropriate. succinctly put, homosexual male-to-female transsexuals are
extremely feminine gay men, and autogynephilic transsexuals are men
erotically obsessed with the image of themselves as women. when
most people hear “transsexual” they think of the homosexual transsexual, who fits the classic pattern. from soon after birth, the homosexual male-to-female transsexual behaves and feels like a girl. unlike
most feminine boys (such as danny, from chapter 3), these transsexuals
do not outgrow, or learn to hide, their femininity. instead, they decide
that the drastic step of changing their sex is preferable. they unambiguously desire and love men, especially heterosexual men, whom
they can attract only as women. (i recognize that using the term “homosexual” to describe a type of transsexual is confusing. transsexualism terminology is often confusing. i often have to think hard
about whether to write “he” or “she,” for example. in this case, there is
scientific precedent—“homosexual transsexualism” was proposed by
the scientist who first discovered that there were two types of transsexuals. the term also is conceptually revealing, because one type of
transsexual man is a kind of homosexual man. read on; you’ll get used
to it.)



terese and cher

147

honest and open autogynephilic transsexuals reveal a much different pattern. they were not especially feminine boys. the first overt
manifestation of what led to their transsexualism was typically during
early adolescence, when they secretly dressed in their mothers’ or sisters’ lingerie, looked at themselves in the mirror, and masturbated.this
activity continued into adulthood, and sexual fantasies became increasingly transsexual—especially the fantasy of having a vulva, perhaps being penetrated by a penis. autogynephilic transsexuals might
declare attraction to women or men, to both, or to neither. but their
primary attraction is to the women that they would become.
these summaries are given here less to clarify than to organize
the information that follows. transsexualism—especially autogynephilic transsexualism—seems so foreign to most people that it requires
a great deal of explanation. and illustration.
so meet cher and terese, most extraordinary friends.terese is shy,
small, and very feminine. cher is extra extroverted, tall, and in some
ways strikingly masculine. terese is mexican-american, cher italianamerican. both terese and cher are transsexuals born boys, now
women. the most unusual fact about them in my experience is that
they are close friends and are different types of transsexuals; serious
socializing between the two types is practically unheard of. terese is a
homosexual transsexual, and cher is autogynephilic. spend the day
with them, listening to their stories and watching the way they behave,
and the difference between homosexual and autogynephilic transsexualism will be forever etched in your mind.
*********
terese was born jose garcia, in mexico. his parents divorced when
jose was young, and he was raised by grandparents. they moved to
chicago when he was 10. from early childhood, jose wanted to be a
girl. “why do girls get prettier things and why do they get to do the
things i like to do?” he wondered. he knew, because everyone around
him told him, that he was a boy. but that did not guide his behavior.
he dressed up as a female as often as he could, played with dolls, was



148

the man who would be queen

the “mommy” when playing house, and avoided the rough boy sports.
his best friends were girls. (in all these senses, he was just like danny,
whom we met earlier. danny probably will not become transsexual,
though he will probably become a gay man. why most very feminine
boys grow up to be gay men and a few get sex changes is not known,
though i’ll speculate about it later.)
although his friends were mainly girls, jose was also intensely
interested in boys, especially when he got to junior high. he began
having crushes on them, especially the athletes, and even some of his
male teachers. he never experienced sexual feelings for a girl or
woman. when he was 13, an older boy initiated jose into sex. jose is
certain that the older boy is now a gay man. he had several gay partners—terese calls this her “gay boy” phase—but began to notice that
he did not find other gay boys or men to be particularly attractive.
they were too feminine. jose was much more attracted to the straight
men that he met. also, jose did not like it when others touched his
penis (or even when he touched it himself). he preferred giving others oral sex, or being penetrated anally, though this latter activity frequently hurt.
when he was 14, jose found some gay friends with similar inclinations toward femininity. they began going out to parties, or shopping, in drag. it was fun to get away with cross-dressing. jose was a late
maturer, with a smooth complexion and no facial hair, so he passed
well. and the straight men he met when in drag frequently pursued
him. this was exciting but frustrating, because obviously, jose could
not let them complete their advances.
jose was lucky to be well liked at school so he was not teased as
mercilessly as many very feminine boys. but his family was not happy
with his development. his father met him after many years and told
him to “stop acting like a girl.” his mother was also disturbed and
worried that he would be gay. as he got older, he made more effort to
appear masculine, though he kept his hair long. pictures from this time
show jose to be a rather androgynous young man, but clearly a man.



terese and cher

149

he did not feel more masculine, but merely put his femininity in the
closet.
jose took a job at the chicago board of options that required
him to dress conservatively. during this time, he became depressed.
he dreaded waking up and putting on a tie every day, and hiding his
femininity was sufficiently stressful that his hair started falling out.
one day at age 19, jose was brooding about his future. his voice was
finally deepening noticeably and he was getting facial hair. he decided
that he could not live the rest of his life as a man, even if it meant
being abandoned by his family. the next day, jose began to live full
time as a woman, and terese was born. when she told her friends and
family of her decision, her mother expressed relief rather than shock.
she had known from early on that terese’s identity was more feminine
than masculine. only one friend, a gay man, objected to terese’s decision. he said that she was “selling out,” abandoning a gay identity
because she could not deal with social ostracism. (terese disagrees that
this played any part in her decision.)
terese had learned over the years where homosexual transsexuals
congregated (primarily gay bars and dance clubs as well as a few small
bars that featured female impersonators), and she increasingly frequented those places. she felt more comfortable there, and she discovered that she could benefit from the cumulative knowledge of “girls”
in her situation. for example, an important immediate consequence of
her transition was her decision to begin taking the female hormone,
estrogen, to prevent her body from becoming more masculine, and to
feminize it. other transsexuals told her where she could get estrogen
on the black market and how much to take. (this was risky because
estrogen can have serious side effects, although the worst ones, such as
blood clots, are rare. in chicago these days, though, most homosexual
transsexuals do not bother with official medicine because physicians
charge so much and because they are used to living beyond society’s
rules.) she also learned about sex reassignment surgery, surgery to
change the penis into a neo-vagina: how much surgery cost at different places and which surgeons did the best job.



150

the man who would be queen

terese had several sexual relationships during this time. in each
case, the man assumed she was a non-transsexual female, and terese
did not initially tell him otherwise. she would interact sexually with
him, having oral sex for instance. only after she saw him several times,
both of them growing more attached, and the issue of intercourse
arose, would she consider telling him the truth. twice, she risked honesty. both times were traumatic, the men disappointed, angry, and repulsed, terese hurt and afraid. still, one of the men got used to the
idea, and they continued romantically and sexually, for a while. during
sex,terese always behaved as a woman, and this partner never touched
her penis. he continued to think of terese as a woman, albeit an
unusual one. still, the relationship did not go anywhere, and the man
did not treat terese very well. she discovered that he had a steady
girlfriend, for example. although many naturally born women have
been mistreated by men,terese thinks the fact that she was a she-male
(a woman with a penis) prevented men from committing to her.
terese lived as a woman for three years before she got enough
money together (about $10,000) to get her operation. part of the
money was a loan from cher, who had become one of her best friends.
in july 1997, terese (then 25) flew to belgium and over a four-day
period, had sex reassignment surgery, learned to care for her new vagina, and recovered sufficiently to leave the hospital. within three
months, her neo-vagina had healed, and she lost her neo-virginity
soon after.
in many ways terese has blossomed since her surgery. she looks
great. not only do people fail to notice that she is a transsexual, but
most men find her sexy and attractive. depressed and in self-imposed
isolation when i first saw her, she is flirtatious, energetic, and socially
busy now. among other things, she models lingerie. she has dated and
had sex with several heterosexual men, none of whom knew about
her past life. (she is still looking for a serious boyfriend.) her mother
is thrilled to have her new daughter. for one, she is relieved for terese,
knowing how much she wanted this. but she is also happy to have a



terese and cher

151

very attractive feminine daughter rather than an unhappy and noticeably feminine son. when she visited terese, she proudly took her new
daughter shopping.
in an attempt to make a new life for herself, terese has distanced
herself from her old transsexual friends. when she goes out to meet
men, she does not want to have her secret revealed by being with
people who are visually identifiable as transsexual, or who are widely
known to be transsexual.this has caused varying degrees of difficulties
with her old friends. cher, for one, is deeply hurt, and they have fallen
out as friends. however, even cher admits that terese’s new life appears
to suit her.
in important respects, terese’s story is the story of all homosexual
male-to-female transsexuals. her early, extreme, and effortless femininity, her unambiguous preference for heterosexual men as sex partners, her (however brief) attempt to live as a gay man, and her difficulty in securing the right kind of guy prior to surgery, are almost
universal among this type of transsexual. there are some differences
among them, to be sure. for example, although terese disliked her
penis, some homosexual transsexuals not only like, but also use, their
penises while they have them. some, like terese, alternate between
unsatisfying and limited sexual relationships and self-imposed isolation; others earn good livings as she-male prostitutes (more on this
later).these differences reflect differences in personality styles. fundamentally, all homosexual transsexuals are similar, and after a bit of experience, easily distinguishable from the other type of transsexual.
*********
cher, né chuck mondavi, was born in chicago to lower middleclass parents. cher remembers her father as a nervous, punitive, and
eccentric man, who had a nervous breakdown when chuck was
young. chuck was sometimes withdrawn and shy, but not feminine.
he participated in boys’ sports and activities and had male friends.
cher remembers that chuck had occasional wishes to be a girl as



152

the man who would be queen

early as age six. however, no one but chuck knew of these, and no
one else would have surmised this based on chuck’s behavior.
in late childhood or early adolescence, around the age of 12,
chuck was an altar boy at early mass. his parents went to mass later,
giving chuck free rein in the house. during this time, he began to
dress secretly in his mother’s lingerie: panties, girdle, or bra. he would
look at himself in the mirror, become increasingly sexually aroused,
and then masturbate to orgasm. sometimes when his parents were
home, he would wear lingerie under his male clothing, look at the
lingerie models in a sears catalogue, and rub his penis against the bed,
making sure to stop the activity when his mother entered the room.
while looking at the catalogue, he imagined that he was the lingerie
model. chuck was artistic, and one early creation involved painting
some coconut shells flesh color, and wearing them as breasts during
cross-dressing.
as his adolescence progressed, chuck cross-dressed and masturbated at least once per week. he also masturbated while looking at
playboy, and his fantasies alternated between having sex with the
centerfold and recreating her with his own body. as a senior in high
school, he worked in a store that carried women’s clothing. one night
he worked late, mopping floors, and as he noticed the hosiery and
fishnet stockings, could not resist the urge to take some home to use
in his cross-dressing sessions.
chuck attended an all-boys high school. although chuck might
have been considered a bit eccentric, his classmates did not suspect
that he was a cross-dresser. cross-dressing was his secret life. he believed that his activities were unusual, and he was often ashamed of
them, so when he went to college, chuck tried to “purge” by not
bringing clothes along. when he participated in a panty raid, and
acquired several bras and pairs of panties, he hung them up in his
room as trophies. when his roommate left their dorm room, chuck
gave in to his urge to cross-dress.
his artistic creativity was flourishing. he won a painting competi-



terese and cher

153

tion and the art faculty began to buy his paintings. he kept quirky
hours, working at all hours of the night at a studio, where he could
usually cross-dress in private. he ultimately dropped out of college
because he thought he could make it as an artist. cher refers to what
followed as chuck’s “bum period.” during this time, chuck began
feeling depressed about cross-dressing because it made him feel “freakish” and “lonely.” (chuck was still a virgin, and did not have an active
dating life.) he sought behavior modification therapy and stopped
cross-dressing for about five years. during this time, he met and confided in a psychologist, who, cher believes, wanted to cure chuck,
and they became romantically involved. at age 33, chuck lost his
virginity. chuck did not find the relationship gratifying, however, and
it did not last.
after the break-up, chuck was driving through a poor neighborhood and noticed a wig in a garbage can. he stopped the car and
waited, struggling with the intense urge to get out and get the wig. he
drove on, but after a few blocks the urge was so intense that he drove
back to the garbage can and collected the wig. oddly, there were
other items of women’s clothing with the wig—cher suspects that
chuck had stumbled on the results of a cross-dresser’s recent purge.
soon after this, chuck made peace with cross-dressing and stopped
worrying whether it was normal or acceptable.
this began a period in chuck’s life marked by a devotion to
cross-dressing that was both obsessive and highly creative. he began
collecting pornography that featured pictorial stories of women in
various stages of dress and undress (nurses, stewardesses, and so on). he
searched junk clothing stores and clothing catalogues to recreate their
costumes, and cross-dressed and fantasized about them in private.
chuck’s fantasies began to involve more than looking like a
woman. increasingly, he began to fantasize about having a vagina, and
about being penetrated by a man. he was not attracted to any specific
man, and he did not fantasize about specific men, only faceless men,
and their penises. he enjoyed the fantasy of being physically dominated, as well as vaginally penetrated, by a man.



154

the man who would be queen

his activities also progressed. he used a coke bottle to penetrate
his anus, fantasizing that it was a penis penetrating his vagina. chuck’s
artistic talents began to come into play. he constructed a “robot man”
that could fulfill the fantasy of penetration.“robot man” had a body, a
penis made of a dildo, and even an arm that chuck could manipulate
to make it feel as if it was stroking his back. chuck attached a mirror
to his bedroom ceiling, and could view the image of the robot man on
top of chuck, dressed as a woman, “penis” in chuck’s anus.
chuck also began to take more elaborate steps to create the image of himself as a woman. he wore fake breasts and a feminine mask.
(chuck still had a beard.) he purchased several fake vaginas from
adult bookstores. although these are made for heterosexual men to
view and penetrate, chuck reversed that function. born with one
testicle, he discovered that he could invert his penis and scrotum into
his body. he then glued a fake vagina over his inverted genitals. ever
the artist (and an exhibitionist as well), chuck frequently videotaped
himself as a woman. in one segment, chuck begins by standing “naked” (except for shoes) with mask and fake breasts and fake vagina. as
donna summer sings “love to love you baby” in the background,
chuck begins to walk toward the camera, somewhat awkwardly in
high heels. cut to chuck, similarly “dressed,” astride a dildo (which is
anally penetrating him, though the image is constructed to look as if
the penetration is vaginal), with the soundtrack (from a porno film) of
a woman’s sexual moaning.
these activities, and the fantasies they fulfilled, were enormously
erotic to chuck, and they were all-consuming. he spent all night
cross-dressing and enacting fantasies, and slept all day. he had abandoned art (except for his artistic contributions to his sexual fantasies).
his family was concerned, because they felt that he was physically
neglecting himself. he did not bathe regularly, for example, and others
complained that he stank. most of chuck’s physical energies were
devoted to cross-dressing and related sexual activity. cher recalls that
once when chuck was cross-dressed and having sex with “robot man,”



terese and cher

155

the ceiling mirror partially detached and hit him in the head. he
wondered what people would have thought if he had been killed and
his body subsequently discovered. he began to doubt his sanity, but
could not stop. he was becoming seriously depressed. he was lonely,
and disgusted with what he felt was his own narcissism.
soon after this, he sought treatment for depression. he confided
in a psychiatrist about his secret life. by coincidence, the psychiatrist
had worked with john money, the eminent sex researcher. he suggested that chuck might be a transsexual rather than “merely” a transvestite (or heterosexual cross-dresser). subsequently, chuck was assessed at a gender clinic in wisconsin, where he was diagnosed a
transsexual.this was an enormous relief and he felt that his obsessions
were now more explicable. chuck now knew what he wanted to do
with his life: become a woman and have sex with other people rather
than by himself. he dismantled “robot man” and began to plan for his
transition.
cher (named for the performer, whom cher feels she resembles)
was born in 1991. her mother had died by then, but her dying father
accepted her decision in good spirits. his death later that year gave
cher the inheritance she needed to pay for her surgery. one year and
a day after chuck became cher, cher got sex reassignment surgery in
montreal. she was 40 years old. by then, both parents were dead, and
many of her remaining family rejected her. (this was due in part to
disagreement about the disposition of her father’s estate.) despite this,
for the most part cher has been happier than chuck was. she is more
outgoing and feels that she lives a real life now, instead of a fantasy life.
despite her negative experiences with her family, many other people
have accepted her. for example, she attended the 25th reunion of her
all male high school class—as a woman. pictures of that event clearly
show that her classmates enjoyed and admired her. she continues to
play the dulcimer in the irish folk music group she helped form as a
man; her fellow musicians have no problem with this.
during the time between cher’s birth and her full transition, she



156

the man who would be queen

had sex with several men, always involving their penetrating her anally.
always, in these experiences she thought of herself as a woman rather
than a man. although she remained attracted to women, she did not
manage to have sex with any. cher insists that once chuck became
cher, the sexual focus was no longer a self-image, but other people.
after her sex change, she had vaginal sex with several men. nevertheless, she complains about her sex life and has not had a partner lately.
many men can tell that she is transsexual, and cher insists on being
honest about her past before becoming sexually involved.the fact that
cher used to be chuck is a problem for most men. some men are
simply rude and cruel to her. unlike many of her friends, cher is
unwilling to engage in casual sex with men (or women) and is waiting
for someone who wants to spend time with her and date her. when
she gets sexually aroused, she still masturbates simulating intercourse
with a dildo while looking in a mirror; now the dildo penetrates her
vagina rather than her anus.
i have never met anyone quite like cher before. this is in part
because cher is a character, and she would be a character even if it
were not for her unusual sex life and sex change. she is eccentric,
talkative, and exhibitionistic. (one of the most strangely hilarious experiences i have ever witnessed was cher lecturing to a group of
gifted adolescents about transsexualism. she began dressed as a roughtalking man and eventually stripped down to cher, in a bikini. i will
never forget the wide-open, 16-year-old mouths.) although some elements of cher’s story are very common to this kind of transsexual
(especially the erotic cross-dressing), others (such as the wearing of
fake vaginas) are unique to her. at least i have never met other transsexuals who admitted to this. nevertheless, i think that cher is a wonderful example of the second kind of transsexualism, less because she is
representative than because she openly and floridly exemplifies the
essential feature of this type, which is autogynephilia.



chapter

9

men trapped in
men’s bodies

r

ay blanchard, head of the clinical
sexology program of the clarke institute of psychiatry in toronto,
knows more about transsexualism than just about anyone else. like so
many sex researchers, blanchard’s introduction to sex research was
fortuitous rather than intentional. a rat psychologist by training, his
first job was as a clinical psychologist at the ontario correctional
institute. he worked full time evaluating and treating inmates and was
miserable. “i didn’t want to spend 100 percent of my time as a frontline clinician. i wanted to make a scientific contribution. plus, the
prison environment was stressful, if never dull.” during that time, the
eminent sex researcher, kurt freund, consulted at the hospital. someone suggested that they meet, and during their first conversation, they
made plans to collaborate. in 1980 blanchard took a job at the clarke,
where he has remained, recently taking freund’s position after his
death.

157



158

the man who would be queen

blanchard is irreverent, cynical, and politically incorrect. during
the opening ceremony of the international academy of sex research,
during the eulogies for members who died during the previous year,
he regularly engages in wickedly entertaining whispered commentary
about the deceased, unsentimentally recalled. (his eulogy for freund,
however, was serious and touching.) he has little patience for arguments about whether research is good for people (such as “are homosexual people hurt or harmed by research on the genetics of sexual
orientation?”), preferring instead to dwell on whether scientific findings are true. a transsexual colleague of blanchard’s tells how she once
sought his advice regarding a professional dilemma. a member of a
task force about transsexualism, she disliked the first draft of their report, but was worried she would offend the other (non-transsexual)
members of the committee. blanchard’s characteristic advice: “what’s
the point of being a sacred cow if you don’t moo?”
academics remember each other by their “contributions,” or ideas
that make a mark, ideas that get the attention of other academics,
motivating others to study the same thing. blanchard has made two
contributions so far. his most recent work has shown convincingly
that gay men tend to have more older brothers compared with heterosexual men, and he is pursuing an interesting biological theory to
account for this. but i think his more revolutionary contribution has
been to the classification and explanation of transsexualism. in a series
of articles beginning in 1985 and continuing for about a decade,
blanchard established that there are two very different types of men
who change into women, who have very different presentations, motivations, and probably, causes. blanchard’s observations transformed
male-to-female transsexualism from a seemingly chaotic and bizarre
collection of phenomena into two straightforward and clinically comprehensible patterns.
*********
when ray blanchard began studying and treating transsexuals



men trapped in men’s bodies

159

during the early 1980s, the field was rife with different confusing
diagnostic typologies, including anywhere from one to four kinds of
transsexuals. at a merely descriptive level, most clinicians saw a similar
array of gender patients. first was the kind of transsexual that most of
us think of when we hear “transsexual,” the classic, homosexual type,
like terese. from soon after birth, these males behaved like, and desired
to be, female. no one who spent much time with them could be very
surprised that eventually they would choose sex reassignment surgery.
of all transsexual types, this was the one that most seemed to consist
of “women trapped in men’s bodies.”
another type of transsexual that specialists recognized, but which
is less familiar and comprehensible to most people, was the heterosexual transsexual. these males frequently came to treatment as married men who claimed to have had hidden or suppressed longstanding
wishes to be female that they could no longer deny. the clinical
picture of this type was much different than the homosexual transsexual. obviously, of course, one was attracted to men and the other to
women, but there was another striking difference. most heterosexual
transsexuals, and virtually no homosexual transsexuals, reported a phase
beginning during adolescence in which they secretly wore women’s
clothing such as lingerie, became sexually aroused, and masturbated.
cher has a history that is characteristic of many heterosexual transsexuals. however, she has had sexual fantasies about both men and
women, and has had sex with both. she is bisexual.
there was at least one other type of transsexual that experts wrote
about, one that presented a much fuzzier picture. this was a transsexual type whose sexuality was either unclear or absent. these transsexuals claimed to be attracted to neither women nor men, and some
of them claimed to have no sexual feelings at all. some called this type
“asexual.”
to make matters more complicated, there were at least two other
types of men who cross-dressed, but who did not want sex changes.
drag queens were gay men who cross-dressed in public, often for the



160

the man who would be queen

purpose of entertainment (especially lip synching and dancing to music). transsexualism researchers knew that drag queens existed but did
not know much about them because drag queens did not often seek
treatment for their cross-dressing; it caused them no problems. the
other group of men who cross-dressed were called transvestites.these
were heterosexual men, typically married, who dressed in women’s
clothing without any intention of getting a sex change. like heterosexual transsexuals, they frequently acknowledged an erotic component to their cross-dressing, at least during adolescence. the official
psychiatric diagnostic manual of the time, the diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (dsm iii-r) called heterosexual transvestism “transvestic fetishism,” and put it in an entirely different section of
disorders from transsexualism. the diagnostic label implied that transvestites are motivated by an erotic connection to women’s clothing.
heterosexual transvestites are an important part of this story, and they
are probably far more common than transsexuals (no one knows for
sure). so before proceeding, let’s meet one.
*********
stephanie braverman is, despite the name, a 50-ish married man
who holds a high-level position in a national bank, and whose wife is
a well-known administrator in a local university. when stephanie is a
man—which is most of the time—that man is named “don.” i have
never met don. stephanie always looks the same, dressed in tastefully
elegant style—wig, makeup, and all—as a middle-aged matron. after
reading about my interest in gender in a newspaper article, stephanie
called me to “educate” me about heterosexual cross-dressers. we have
met several times, and i have learned much. still, we disagree fundamentally (if good-naturedly) about many things related to crossdressing. one thing we mostly agree on, however, is her basic story.
stephanie remembers don having early (age six or so), vague
wishes to be a girl, but does not think that others found him remarkably feminine. in adolescence, don periodically wore his mother’s lin-



men trapped in men’s bodies

161

gerie, looked in a mirror, and masturbated. he felt ashamed and guilty
about cross-dressing and tried to stop several times, but each time was
unable to refrain for long. in his early 20s, he met the woman he
would marry. before proposing, he told her about his cross-dressing
and said that he intended to stop. his future wife, in love with him by
then, did not even pause to reconsider her commitment. they have
had, by most appearances, a successful marriage, with three children.
several times, during the marriage, don “purged,” throwing away all
his women’s clothing and vowing to quit cross-dressing. (over all his
purges, don probably threw away several thousand dollars worth of
clothing.) following each purge, he felt relieved and virtuous for a
time, but these feelings eventually transformed into irritability, tension,
and despair. each time, don gave in to his cross-dressing urges. after
his last (and final, stephanie hopes) purge attempt failed, he sought
counseling, and his therapist helped him find the chicago chapter of
the society for the second self (or tri-ess), an organization for heterosexual cross-dressers. stephanie has become a leader in the chapter and
speaks frequently (and always as stephanie) to college students and
other receptive audiences. she wants ultimately to diminish the stigma
felt by cross-dressers.
stephanie claims that the erotic component of cross-dressing was
never don’s primary motivation—which was the expression of an
inner femininity—and that he rarely feels aroused any more when
cross-dressed. once in a while, a glimpse in the mirror of how good
don looks as stephanie (especially his legs) gives him an erection, but
this is more annoying than satisfying. stephanie insists that the primary benefit of cross-dressing these days is relaxation. when business
and family duties prevent don from cross-dressing for much longer
than two weeks, he feels tense and irritable.to me it sounds as if don’s
cross-dressing was at one time primarily sexually motivated, and indeed i suspect it still is to a large extent.this is our ongoing argument
and i will return to it.



162

the man who would be queen

*********
diagnosis can advance by either splitting or lumping. splitting
occurs when someone notices two or more superficially similar conditions that had previously been called the same thing. the history of
medical diagnosis has mostly been a story about splitting. some early
classification systems, for example, included the category “fever,” which
subsumed every problem that caused a temperature. in contrast, modern diagnosis distinguishes thousands of conditions that cause fever,
from chicken pox to ebola.
more rarely, diagnosis progresses by lumping. lumping occurs
when two or more apparently different conditions are found to be
different forms of the same, underlying pathology. in the early history
of aids, doctors noticed an increase in a variety of seemingly unrelated conditions, such as pneumocystitis carinii pneumonia, kaposi’s
sarcoma, and cytomegalovirus retinitis, among gay men. eventually,
they hypothesized that these were all consequences of the same infection, and when it was possible to test for hiv, its presence was confirmed in virtually all cases.
ray blanchard’s contribution to transsexual science was of the
lumping variety. distinguishing “homosexual,” “heterosexual,” “bisexual,” and “asexual” transsexuals diagnostically makes sense only if
the different types have fundamentally different causes. otherwise, why
not distinguish “tall,” “medium-sized,” and “short” transsexuals, or
“blonde” and “brunette” subtypes? blanchard noticed some similarities between some of the subtypes that made him suspect that they
were fundamentally similar. in particular, the homosexual subtype
seemed different from all the others, who seemed similar in important
respects. (in order to avoid wordiness, he called the heterosexual, bisexual, and asexual transsexuals the “nonhomosexual” transsexuals.)
for one, the nonhomosexual types were older when they came to
the clarke institute for treatment. this was partly due to the fact that
many of them had postponed their gender concerns to raise families.



men trapped in men’s bodies

163

but even the asexual subtype, who was typically unmarried, came to
treatment later than the homosexual subtype. on average, the
nonhomosexual types showed up at the clarke eight years later than
the homosexual type. the nonhomosexual types also gave somewhat
different childhood histories than the homosexual type, who universally acknowledged marked and noticeable femininity from early on.
in contrast, many of the nonhomosexual types said that they were
unremarkably masculine boys, though they typically reported early
memories of secret longing to be girls.
the most noteworthy difference between the homosexual and
nonhomosexual transsexuals concerned cross-dressing. homosexual
transsexuals recalled that they cross-dressed from early on, but few of
them reported that cross-dressing provoked a sexual response. most
nonhomosexual transsexuals admitted sexual arousal to cross-dressing,
at least in the past. even the asexual subtype did so.
blanchard made a good case that “heterosexual,” “bisexual,” and
“asexual” transsexuals were more like each other than like homosexual transsexuals, and he suspected that they were subtypes of a more
general condition. but what general condition? then blanchard saw a
patient named philip, who proved to be the exception that revealed
the rule.
philip was a 38-year-old, unmarried, business executive who was
referred to the clarke institute of psychiatry because of the persistent
wish to be a woman, accompanied by depression that he was not one.
philip was a happy, masculine boy, who was popular and competent.
philip had cross-dressed only once in his life, at age six. although he
lived alone and could cross-dress easily, he simply had no desire to do
so. since puberty, he had masturbated fantasizing that he was a nude
woman, lying alone in his bed. he would focus on the picture of
having breasts, a vagina, and other female physical characteristics. although philip had had sex with several women, there were indications
that this was not especially rewarding to him. in his only long-term
relationship, he stopped having sex with his girlfriend after only a few



164

the man who would be queen

months. in his last time with a woman, he had difficulty getting an
erection. he has never had sex with a man. however, he had begun to
fantasize about having intercourse with a man, as a woman. the man
in his fantasies was a faceless abstraction rather than a real person.
philip never fantasized about having gay sex with a man, as a man.
philip was near the borderline of nonhomosexual transsexualism,
but he lacked a cardinal sign of that disorder, a history of erotic crossdressing. it dawned on blanchard that what philip had in common
with most nonhomosexual transsexuals, as well as cross-dressers for
that matter, was sexual arousal at the idea of himself as a woman. this
strange sexual desire—for oneself to be transformed into a woman—
seemed to be the fundamental motivation for nonhomosexual
transsexualism. blanchard called it “autogynephilia” (pronounced
otto-guy-nuh-feel-ee-ya). “gynephilia” means attraction to women,
and “auto” means self. autogynephilia accounts for a variety of phenomena that seem otherwise disconnected.
take cross-dressing. at the time that blanchard came up with
autogynephilia, the prevailing explanation of erotic cross-dressing was
that it was like a fetish, a mere association of sexual arousal with inanimate objects. but there were obvious problems with this conceptualization. most men find garter belts and bras to be sexy, probably because of their association with scantily clad women, but most
men do not put them on and look at themselves in the mirror. nor do
cross-dressers merely wear women’s clothing.while cross-dressed, they
typically pretend to be women: taking female names, trying to walk
and sometimes talk like women. according to blanchard, even crossdressers who do not want to change their sex have autogynephilia,
which they share with nonhomosexual transsexuals. this is sensible
because during the teenage years, it is probably impossible to distinguish males who will become nonhomosexual transsexuals from those
who will remain cross-dressers. they are all autogynephiles.
autogynephilia also accounts for the homosexual-like fantasies of
some autogynephilic (i.e., nonhomosexual) transsexuals. these fanta-



men trapped in men’s bodies

165

sies are quite unlike the homosexual fantasies of gay men and homosexual transsexuals. they do not focus on characteristics of the male
partner, but on the transsexual’s female self interacting with the male.
stephanie, the cross-dresser, once told me a fantasy she had been having about me. in her fantasy, i would treat her “like a lady”—take her
out to a nice restaurant and then out dancing. she reassured me that
she did not want to do anything sexual with me (and i had never
sensed that she was sexually attracted to me). as she told me about the
fantasy, however, it was clearly an erotic one. but in contrast to gay
men’s fantasies about other men, i was merely a prop in stephanie’s; i
could have been any male. even in more explicitly sexual fantasies, the
male usually has no face, just a penis and body, which penetrates the
imagined vagina.to many autogynephiles, the act of being penetrated
by a penis is the ultimate statement that one is a woman, and this is
perhaps why it is so arousing to some autogynephiles (such as cher).
blanchard noticed different forms of autogynephilia in the different patients he saw. some patients were sexually aroused by crossdressing, others by the fantasy that they were pregnant, others by the
fantasy that they had breasts, and others by the fantasy that they had
vaginas. one patient even masturbated while fantasizing about knitting in a circle of other knitting women or being at the hairdresser’s
with other women.
blanchard hypothesized that the type of autogynephilia that a man
has should predict whether the man would become transsexual. a
cross-dresser with only transvestitic or behavioral autogynephilia can
probably satisfy his urges by periodically cross-dressing in private or in
the company of other transvestites. but a man whose primary fantasy
is having a vulva cannot enact his fantasy so easily. (not everyone is as
creative as cher, and eventually, wearing fake vaginas did not work for
her either.) blanchard confirmed that, indeed, it was men who fantasized about themselves as nude women, and who focused on the image of having a vulva, who felt the strongest desire to change their sex.
he also found that patients who fantasized about themselves as nude



166

the man who would be queen

women were younger at their first appointment compared with those
patients who fantasized about themselves wearing women’s clothing.
this suggests that autogynephilic transsexualism is not merely a progression from cross-dressing. if it were, the patients who fantasized
about cross-dressing should have been younger, not older (because by
the incorrect interpretation, they would not have yet advanced to the
“nude fantasizing” stage of their condition).
once blanchard asked a group of autogynephilic transsexuals:
“suppose you had the following choice.you could get your sex reassignment surgery but continue to live as a man forever or live as a
woman but never obtain sex reassignment surgery. which would you
do?” about half of the group chose each alternative. those whose
autogynephilia focused on the vagina chose the surgery, and those
focused on the female role chose the role change. of course, most
autogynephilic transsexuals want both.
*********
how are we to think of autogynephilic men? are they more like
gay men, or like heterosexual men? do they really have a woman
hidden inside them? if so, why do they hide their inner femininity,
when some gay men, drag queens, and homosexual transsexuals are
extremely and openly feminine from an early age?
the word “autogynephilia” is difficult, even jarring, and this is
appropriate—the concept it names is bizarre to most people. in order
to understand autogynephilia, it is important to recognize that it differs so much from ordinary experience that it cannot be understood
simply. for example, even heterosexual people can understand homosexuality by thinking, more or less accurately, “it’s just as if i were
attracted to my own sex instead of the other sex.” autogynephiles are
more difficult to fathom.
blanchard believes that autogynephilia is best conceived as misdirected heterosexuality.these men are heterosexual, but due to an error
in the development of normal heterosexual preference, the erotic tar-



men trapped in men’s bodies

167

get (a woman) gets located on the inside (the self) rather than the
outside.this is speculative, and what causes the developmental error is
anyone’s guess.
autogynephilia is not primarily a disorder of gender identity,
except in the obvious sense that the goal of the transsexual is to
become the other sex. at the cross-dressers’ meeting i attended, the
wife of one of the men asked me: “when they say they feel like
women, how do they know what that feels like?”this question, which
reflected the woman’s skepticism about the men’s account, is profound. how do we ever know that we are like someone else? unless
you believe in extrasensory perception (and i don’t), the answer must
be found in overt behavior that somehow signals fundamental similarity. evidently, the woman did not get those signals from the men. (if
instead of being the wife of an autogynephile, she were the sister of a
homosexual transsexual, i doubt she would have asked an analogous
question.) the fact is that despite their obsession with becoming
women, auto-gynephilic transsexuals are not especially feminine. one
told me, for example:
i had a fairly early onset (certainly before age six) of an intense desire to be
a girl (or “like a girl”) physically; or to put it another way, to be female—but
not necessarily to take on the feminine gender role. this took different
forms as i grew older. to a six-year-old, the difference between boys and
girls physically is not primarily genital: girls wear long hair and dresses, and
that’s what i wanted. as i got older, i grew to want other things: breasts, a
vagina, menstruation, pregnancy. in the early stages the dysphoria wasn’t
painful, like a wound; it was more like a yearning for the unobtainable, like
a thirst i couldn’t quench.
however, i didn’t play with dolls, nor do many of the traditional feminine
things that the classic primaries often report. i didn’t like to compete athletically, and i was always afraid of getting hurt; but i liked model cars
and airplanes, and toy guns, too.

this contrasts greatly with the childhood histories of homosexual
transsexuals, whose femininity was remarkable to anyone who observed them closely. nor are autogynephiles especially feminine adults.



168

the man who would be queen

after all, most have been married, and to most observers, appear to be
conventional husbands. autogynephiles rarely have stereotypically female occupations. on the contrary, many have served in the military. i
even met one who was in the green berets. technological and scientific careers seem to me to be over-represented among autogynephiles.
(ray blanchard remarked to me that he saw a seemingly close relation
between autogynephilia and computer nerdiness.) autogynephiles
have claimed that they chose stereotypically masculine occupations to
hide their feminine side, but i doubt this. it seems more consistent
with the overall picture to say that autogynephilia is not associated
with stereotypically feminine interests. finally, autogynephiles do not
typically look or act very feminine, especially in comparison with
homosexual transsexuals. to the extent that autogynephiles achieve a
feminine presentation, it is with great effort. cross-dressers attend
workshops in talking, walking, standing, and gesturing like women.
the work usually pays off eventually in a passable feminine presentation, but it is work.
autogynephiles are not “women trapped in men’s bodies.” (anne
lawrence, a physician and sex researcher who is herself a postoperative
transsexual, has called them “men trapped in men’s bodies.”) homosexual transsexuals, so naturally feminine from early on, can make this
claim more accurately, but as we shall see, it is not completely true
even of them. autogynephiles are men who have created their image
of attractive women in their own bodies, an image that coexists with
their original, male selves. the female self is a man-made creation.
they visit the female image when they want to have sex, and some
became so attached to the female image that they want it to become
their one, true self. this explains the name of the transvestite organization “society for the second self.” it also explains the maddening
tendency of some autogynephilic research subjects to put down two
answers to every question—one by the female self, and one by the
male self. homosexual transsexuals do not do this. they have one self
that is a mixture of masculine and feminine traits, and not alternating



men trapped in men’s bodies

169

selves. no, autogynephiles are not women trapped in men’s bodies.
they are men who desperately want to become women.
*********
we do not have even the beginnings of a respectable theory of the
causes of autogynephilia.this differs from sexual orientation, in which
we have a reasonably well articulated if unproven theory. recall from
chapters 3 and 6 that femininity in boys and homosexuality in men
are probably caused by incomplete masculinization of the brain during sexual differentiation.
autogynephilia in the form of cross-dressing is still called
“transvestic fetishism” in the dsm iv-tr, and many people have suggested that fetishism arises as a kind of conditioning experience. as
the guy at the cross-dressers’ meeting put it, panties are sexy, so some
men become aroused wearing them.the problem with this account is
that although it might explain a fetish for panties, it does not explain
why men should want to wear the panties. conditioning explanations
of both sexual preferences and fears (the other domain where they are
common) have received little convincing support, although many
people believe them. blanchard’s conceptualization of cross-dressing,
as arousal by an image of oneself as a woman, is very different from the
idea of a fetish. conceptualized blanchard’s way, it is difficult to see
how cross-dressing could arise through conditioning.
some autogynephiles claim that their first cross-dressing experience was in the context of being punished (usually by some female
friend or relative, who forced them to cross-dress to humiliate them),
and that this is how they acquired their taste for cross-dressing. i find
these reports dubious. they sound more like fantasies or attempts to
explain their behavior in ways that sound plausible to others. in any
case, the fact that most autogynephiles do not claim these experiences
suggests that they cannot be causally crucial.
regarding the fundamental question of whether autogynephiles
are born or made, my intuitions are with “born.” perhaps every day in



170

the man who would be queen

this country, at least one adolescent boy secretly puts on his mother’s
or sister’s lingerie for the first time, becomes sexually aroused, and
masturbates. as far as anyone can tell, there is nothing unusual about
the environments of these boys, and certainly nothing in their environments obviously contributes to their unusual preoccupation. this
smells innate to me. (i do not claim to be making a strong case here.)
anecdotally, i have heard several accounts of first-degree relatives
(brothers, or fathers and sons) who discovered that both were crossdressers. the discovery was invariably after both relatives had a great
deal of cross-dressing experience that they had hidden from each
other. this smells genetic to me. again, though, this is not meant to
be a strong argument.
autogynephilic cross-dressing usually begins in late childhood or
early adolescence, but this does not mean that it is not biological.
(pubic hair also begins at adolescence.) some autogynephiles claim
that they have early memories of their condition, such as the desire to
be female. i have tended to be skeptical about these memories, but a
recent case seen by psychologist ken zucker at the clarke institute
has made me more open-minded.this was a three-year-old boy whose
mother had brought him in to the clinic because of his cross-dressing,
which she first observed at around age two. according to the mother,
the boy wore her or his sisters’ underwear, lingerie, slips, and nighties.
the mother also reported that (at age three!) he got erections when
looking at women’s clothing in magazine advertisements, and he would
demand that she buy the items he was viewing. his cross-dressing was
sporadic, rather than continuous, and it did not appear to reflect early
femininity—he did not say he wanted to be a girl or have other feminine interests, for example. the most fascinating development came
when zucker interviewed the father, who admitted that he had crossdressed erotically since adolescence. there was no indication that the
boy had ever seen his father do this or had any opportunity to learn
the behavior from him. i predict (as does zucker) that when he grows
up, the boy is very likely to have some variety of autogynephilia. his



men trapped in men’s bodies

171

early onset also smells biological, though as i stressed, early onset is not
a necessary component of innate behavior.
highly relevant to the nature-nurture question is whether
autogynephilia has occurred in most cultures and times. in fact, there
is only very limited evidence about its occurrence prior to magnus
hirschfeld’s classic work, die transvestiten, published in 1910. there
are a few more-or-less definitive accounts, such as the abbé de choisy,
who lived in france from 1644 until 1724. although the historical
record does not document choisy’s masturbatory habits (he was, after
all, a cleric), it is clear that he was a heterosexual cross-dresser. he was
romantically drawn to women, whom he preferred dressed as men. in
fact, he once arranged a marriage ceremony in which he dressed as
the bride, and the woman as the groom. he clearly experienced crossdressing, and particularly being admired as a woman, as erotic. he had
periods in which he felt guilty about his unusual preoccupation and
purged, just as contemporary cross-dressers do.
the cross-cultural occurrence of autogynephilia has not been well
established (in contrast to homosexual transsexualism, which has been).
this is not surprising. it is probably rare, secretive, and poorly understood. on the other hand, i expect that it occurs everywhere.
blanchard has seen autogynephilic transsexualism in immigrants from
europe and asia.
in order to progress scientifically toward the causes of autogynephilia, it will be useful to keep in mind that autogynephilia seems
to be a type of paraphilia. paraphilias comprise a set of unusual sexual
preferences that include autogynephilia, masochism, sadism, exhibitionism (i.e., exposing one’s genitals to strangers for sexual excitement), frotteurism (rubbing oneself against strangers, such as in a
crowded bus, for sexual excitement), necrophilia, bestiality, and pedophilia. because some of these preferences (especially pedophilia) are
harmful, i hesitated to link them to autogynephilia, which is not harmful. but there are two reasons to think that these sexual preferences
have some causes in common. first, all paraphilias occur exclusively



172

the man who would be queen

(or nearly exclusively) in men. second, paraphilias tend to go together.
if a man has one paraphilia, then his chances of having any other
paraphilia seem to be highly elevated. the best established link is between autogynephilia and masochism. there is a dangerous masochistic practice called “autoerotic asphyxia,” in which a man strangles himself, usually by hanging, for sexual reasons. although autoerotic
asphyxiasts arrange an escape hatch—for example, a well-placed stool
they can stand on before it’s too late—sometimes things go wrong.
perhaps 100 american men per year die in this way. about onefourth of the time, these men are found wearing some article of
women’s clothing, such as panties. there is no obvious reason why
autoerotic asphyxia should require cross-dressing. apparently, these
men are both masochistic and autogynephilic. cross-dressing has also
been linked to sexual sadism—although most autogynephiles are not
sexual sadists, they are more likely to be sadists compared with men
who are not autogynephilic.
paraphilias tend to seem bizarre to typical gay and straight people,
whose sexual desires are primarily directed toward conventional sex
acts with adults. social explanations of paraphilias tend to be strained
and unconvincing. what kind of experiences would make men risk
their lives to become sexually aroused from being strangled while
wearing panties? i’m betting on biology.
my gut feelings may say as much about my biases as they do about
the evidence, which is admittedly scanty. other people might look at
the same evidence and reach the opposite conclusion. however, no
one could honestly and competently say that we are anywhere close to
understanding the causes of autogynephilia, or more generally,
paraphilias.
*********
“most gender patients lie,” says maxine petersen, the ace gender
clinician at the clarke. one common lie among autogynephiles, according to petersen, is that they are homosexual rather than hetero-



men trapped in men’s bodies

173

sexual. the motivation for that lie is probably the fear that a gender
clinic will deny them a sex change if they are determined to be heterosexual. and indeed, some psychiatrists have taken the position that
nonhomosexual transsexuals are uniquely inappropriate for sex reassignment because they are not “true” transsexuals.* autogynephiles
who claimed to be homosexual transsexuals could account for the
apparent cases of homosexual transsexuals who practiced erotic crossdressing. other common lies, according to petersen and others, include an exaggeration of early femininity. this might in some cases
have the same motivation.
the most common way that autogynephiles mislead others is by
denying the erotic component of their gender bending. for example,
when stephanie braverman lectures to my human sexuality class, she
does not even mention her history of masturbating while cross-dressed.
when i spoke at a meeting of chicago cross-dressers, the men became
clearly uncomfortable when i brought up the erotic component of
their activity, preferring instead to attribute it to their inner femininity.
when i pointed this out, one cross-dresser said “i wear feminine clothing because i feel feminine, and i can’t help getting aroused because
the clothes are sexy. any man would.” i don’t think so. but you can
judge. here is one of the passages that aroused the cross-dressers in
blanchard’s study. see if you think it is sexy.
you have plenty of time to dress this evening. you slip your panties over
your ankles and pull them up to your waist. sitting on the edge of your bed,
you put on a pair of sheer nylon stockings.you fasten the stockings with the
snaps of your lacy garter belt.you slip your arms through the straps of your
brassiere and reach behind you to fasten it. you put on your eye shadow,

*the clarke institute does not discriminate against autogynephiles and, indeed,
blanchard wrote an uncharacteristically impassioned passage in one article urging
readers not to use his findings to justify such discrimination. however, as recently as
1989, blanchard and his colleagues from the clarke opined that “heterosexual applicants for sex reassignment should be evaluated with particular caution” because of an
increased likelihood of postoperative regret.



174

the man who would be queen
mascara, and lipstick. lying on your bed, you look up at your reflection in
the large mirror on the ceiling.

why do some autogynephiles deny the sexual component of their
condition? one reason, again, is the real or imagined treatment implications. some psychiatrists refuse to recommend for sex reassignment
any man who has had even one incident of erotic cross-dressing. but
this fear surely cannot explain the resistance of stephanie braverman
and the cross-dressers at the meeting—they are not trying to become
women.
perhaps the major reason is shame and assumed social reaction.
the physician harry benjamin, who popularized the word “transsexual,” noticed early on that cross-dressers, and especially crossdressers in organizations trying to influence the public, tend to deemphasize the erotic element. he suggested that they do this in order
to be more accepted by others. today, public statements by those who
call themselves “transgendered” (who are almost all autogynephiles
rather than homosexual transsexuals) rarely acknowledge any erotic
component of “transgenderism.”
there is also a more personal motivation to deny the erotic component of autogynephilia. anne lawrence put it this way:
i imagine most men would be humiliated to admit that dressing in women’s
clothing is a sexual kick, and even more humiliated to admit that doing so,
or fantasizing doing so, is obligatory for climax some or all of the time. just
dressing in women’s clothing is shameful enough; but having one’s sexual
potency contingent upon such an unmanly, “ridiculous” crutch would be
almost impossible to admit. moreover, for anyone who thinks about it, the
whole experience of reliance on paraphilic behavior or fantasy for arousal is
rather tragic and lonely: it cuts one off from intimate contact during
partnered sex, because one is (at least mentally) often making love to oneself rather than to one’s partner. better not to admit this to anyone—especially to one’s wife. i think that if the wives of heterosexual cross-dressers
knew what their husbands were really thinking about at the moment of
climax, they would be appalled. (of course, this might apply to the wives of
other straight men as well; but it’s one thing to learn he’s fantasizing about
making love to claudia schiffer, and another to learn he’s fantasizing about
being forced to wear a french maid’s outfit.) on the other hand, to at-



men trapped in men’s bodies

175

tribute one’s cross-dressing to a desire to express one’s “feminine side” is
much more acceptable. though the behavior may still appear ridiculous,
the putative rationale allows the cross-dresser to portray himself as multifaceted, courageous, and even empathic with his spouse. that’s a far easier
script for most men to follow.

in my experience, most laypeople are happy to accept the “i’m a
woman in a man’s body” narrative, and don’t really want to know
about autogynephilia—even though the preferred narrative is misleading and it is impossible to understand nonhomosexual transsexualism without autogynephilia. when i have tried to educate
journalists who have called me as an expert on transsexualism, they
have reacted uncomfortably. one said: “we just can’t put that into a
family newspaper.” perhaps not, but then they can’t print the truth.
there is one more reason why many autogynephiles provide misleading information about themselves that is different than outright
lying. it has to do with obsession. something about autogynephilia
creates a need not only to enact a feminine self, but also to actually
believe in her. it seems important to them to emphasize the permanence of the feminine self as well as her primacy: “i was always feminine, i just managed to hide it. i became a green beret as a defensive
response to my femininity.” in such accounts, the feminine self is the
real self; the masculine self is the creation. (i have been arguing that the
opposite is closer to the truth.) intersexuality refers to congenital conditions in which biological sex is ambiguous, usually due to hormonal
or genetic problems. cheryl chase, the intersex activist, told me that
transsexuals frequently join intersex groups because they are convinced
that they are also intersexual. in most cases, they are not. i assume that
these are autogynephilic transsexuals who want to believe that there is
a real biological woman inside them as well as a real psychological
woman.
the self-presentational deceptiveness of some autogynephiles is a
main reason why autogynephilia was not understood until recently.
many clinicians—even some who write books—have taken the information that transsexuals tell them at face value. i recently attended a



176

the man who would be queen

talk by a well-known psychologist at an academic sex conference in
which she presented a case that was clearly autogynephilic (he’d been
married and was in his late 40s, among other signs). however, she
spoke not one word about her patient’s sexual fantasies, dwelling instead on the usual “woman trapped in a man’s body” story. blanchard’s
ideas have not yet received the widespread attention they deserve, in
large part because sex researchers are not as scholarly as they should be
and so don’t read the current scientific journals.
and although blanchard’s ideas are fundamental to an understanding of transsexualism, they might not matter that much for helping
transsexuals, which most clinicians have as their first priority. with
luck, the next revision of the dsm will distinguish “homosexual”
from “autogynephilic” transsexualism. but will popular features on “the
transgendered” begin to mention the teenage masturbatory crossdressing? will “the cher mondavi story” become a made-fortelevision movie co-starring “robot man?” probably not, and it is a
pity.true acceptance of the transgendered requires that we truly understand who they are.



chapter

10

in search of
womanhood and men

i

wrote first about autogynephilic
transsexualism because it is so much
less familiar, and harder to grasp, than
homosexual transsexualism. as i mentioned, most people have homosexual transsexuals in mind when they think of transsexuals at all. but
homosexual transsexualism is also an interesting, complex condition,
and as is the case with autogynephiles, there are misconceptions about
homosexual transsexuals. my own recent research has focused on the
homosexual type. oddly enough, most of the homosexual transsexuals
i have met, i met through cher, who is the other type of transsexual.
this is odd because, as i have mentioned, in the united states and
canada these days, homosexual male-to-female and autogynephilic
transsexuals do not run in the same circles. none of the homosexual
transsexuals i asked had ever met a transsexual like cher before. (homosexual transsexuals do socialize with each other. most of “cher’s
girls” had met each other before meeting cher.)

177



178

the man who would be queen

cher’s connection with the homosexual transsexuals is her doing.
early in her transition, after she was diagnosed as “transsexual,” she
decided that she wanted to try the “major leagues.” (cher’s frequent
allusions to sports and automobiles are sufficient to indicate that she is
not a homosexual transsexual.) so she went to gay clubs and gay bars
looking for accomplished transsexuals—those who looked and acted
like attractive, sexy women. she watched them, befriended them, and
learned from them. when i met her, she not only lived with a homosexual transsexual, but her best friend was one, and she was advisor,
confidante, or chauffeur to several others. her friends’ experiences,
contrasted with her own, have made her an astute observer of their
differences. when i asked her opinion about the main difference between transsexuals “from gay versus straight backgrounds” (as she puts
it), she said, “gay transsexuals are boy crazy.”
one implication of cher’s assertion is that homosexual transsexuals are like gay men. many of the facts discussed in the last section on
gay men apply to homosexual male-to-female transsexuals. for example, the causes of homosexual transsexualism are largely the causes
of homosexuality. to be sure, only a small minority of gay men become transsexual, but homosexual transsexuals are a type of gay man.
richard green began his important study of feminine boys (discussed
in the last section) precisely to see if he could predict which boys
would become transsexual adults. sensibly, after hearing the memories
of transsexual patients, he sought extremely feminine boys. in adulthood, most of these boys were gay men, and only one of the sixty in
his study was clearly transsexual. evidently, something prevents most
very feminine boys from becoming transsexual. in order for a feminine boy to become transsexual, something extra must happen.
what is the “something extra”? ken zucker, whom we met in
chapter 2, has tried to predict which boys with gender identity disorder (gid) would still have the disorder when they become adolescents. adolescents with gid are much rarer and presumably much
closer to being transsexual. zucker found several predictors of adoles-



in search of womanhood and men

179

cent gid: lower iq, lower social class, immigrant status, non-intact
family, and childhood behavior problems unrelated to gender identity
disorder. obviously, none of these factors can be considered very specific. parental divorce and low social class are both very common, and
most males who experience them do not become transsexual. the
factors do, however, suggest a common theme: early adversity. i will
speculate later about what this might mean.
when i have discussed the theory that homosexual transsexuals
are a type of gay man, i have met resistance. i was surprised at this, for
the idea is neither new nor, it seemed to me, controversial. some of
the resistance was emotional. people who believe that homosexuality
is not a disorder tend to dislike the implication that a subset of homosexuals are disordered. i think that this is a bad reason to object to the
theory, no better than to object to the theory that autogynephilia is a
form of heterosexuality because autogynephilia can be considered a
disorder.
another reason why people have difficulty with the notion that
homosexual transsexualism is a form of homosexuality is that at their
endpoints, the two conditions seem quite different. the picture of the
muscular gay man in leather looks quite different from that of the
shapely postoperative transsexual in an evening dress. but look at the
entire trajectory. as i have emphasized, as boys, some gay men look
just like transsexuals. nearly all homosexual transsexuals go through a
stage in which they are “gay boys,” feminine to be sure, but not distinctly more feminine than many gay boys who will become gay men.
and there is that “missing link” between transsexuals and ordinary gay
men—the drag queen. drag queens are gay men who cross-dress occasionally but who have no intention of changing their sex, and who
do not take measures to physically feminize their bodies. unlike heterosexual cross-dressers, drag queens do not become sexually aroused
by dressing in women’s clothes. some drag queens are transsexuals
who have not yet accepted it, but for others, occasional cross-dressing
is as close to female as they will ever get. in our study, we found that



180

the man who would be queen

drag queens ranked between gay men and transsexuals on a number of
traits related to femininity. also, they liked their penises much more
than transsexuals did.
the other reason some people object to linking homosexual
transsexualism with homosexuality is, they argue, that this confuses
sexuality with gender. the standard transsexual narrative says that
transsexualism is not about sex but about “gender identity,” or the
internal sense that one is a man or a woman. according to this narrative, transsexuals want to change their sex because their sense of self
disagrees with their bodies, not because they have any unusual sexual
preferences that depend on a sex change. while the first part of this
explanation sometimes may be true, the latter is not. it should be clear
by now that the “gender, not sex” part of the transsexual narrative is
false for autogynephiles, whether they are transsexuals or merely crossdressers. autogynephilia is a very unusual sexual orientation (towards
oneself as a woman), and it is usually accompanied by specific and
intense sexual imagery. but it would be a mistake to think of
autogynephilic transsexualism as the sexual type of transsexualism, and
homosexual transsexualism as the type that is solely a disorder of gender identity. homosexual transsexuals are in their own way just as
sexually motivated as autogynephiles.
*********
there is no way to say this as sensitively as i would prefer, so i will
just go ahead. most homosexual transsexuals are much better looking
than most autogynephilic transsexuals.there is the rare exception, but
for the most part, autogynephilic transsexuals aspire (with some success) to be presentable, while homosexual transsexuals aspire (with
equivalent success) to be objects of desire. homosexual transsexuals
have been models and actresses. for example, the model, tula, was in
several movies and posed for playboy before she was exposed as a transsexual.
there are three reasons why homosexual transsexuals are better



in search of womanhood and men

181

looking. first, they are typically younger when they start transitioning.
this almost certainly helps prevent some of the masculinization that
might have occurred had they waited 8 to 10 years, when they would
be the same age as the typical autogynephile. second, they want to
attract men, and they get constant feedback (in the form of propositions from men and mostly unsolicited critical advice from their transsexual sisters) about how they are doing. this allows them to hone
their presentations faster than the autogynephilic transsexual, who has
spent most of her femme life looking at a mirror by herself.
finally, homosexual transsexuals are better looking because homosexual men who want to be women tend not to enact that desire
unless they can pull it off. the standard transsexual story implies that
the transsexual is so dissatisfied with her incorrect male body that she
cannot wait to discard it, regardless of how good she will look as a
woman.this is another place where the standard narrative is wrong, at
least about homosexual transsexuals. i have begun asking the homosexual transsexuals i meet whether, if they had looked awful as women,
they would have transitioned to full-time females. most have said “no,”
and no one has answered with an unambiguous “yes.” extremely muscular and masculine looking homosexual transsexuals probably choose
not to transition, but instead remain among gay men, who value their
masculine looks. blanchard has found that homosexual transsexuals
tend to be physically smaller than their autogynephilic sisters, which
is consistent with just this sort of self-selection. the “before” and
“after” pictures they have shown me also support my thesis. as men,
the homosexual transsexuals look and act extremely feminine, and
that presentation is not very marketable among gay men. they are far
more fetching as women.
kim, whom i mentioned at the start of this section, exemplifies
the dilemma that some homosexual transsexuals face. recall that
when i first saw kim, she was at crobar with a very handsome and
muscular man, and i thought they looked sufficiently like a beautiful
heterosexual couple that i refrained from approaching her. sure



182

the man who would be queen

enough, though, when i told my transsexual informants about her
later, they recognized the description and claimed kim as one of their
own. i arranged to interview her for the study we were conducting.
when she came to my laboratory, my initial impression was reconfirmed. she was stunning. (afterwards, my avowedly heterosexual male
research assistant told me that he would gladly have had sex with her,
even knowing that kim still possessed a penis.) yet despite her appearance, kim was the most ambivalent homosexual transsexual i had met.
she didn’t know if she wanted the operation. it turned out that the
handsome man with her at crobar is a gay man, who enjoys her
company and being seen with her, but who of course could never be
attracted to kim the way she looked that night. kim had fallen in love
with him, however. because she knew that she could never have him
as a transsexual or a woman, she was considering reversing her transition and becoming a man again. in her case, this would have meant
removing breast implants and silicon in her hips. she also said she
would probably have to hit the gym to bulk up. as she told me of her
dilemma, i increasingly wondered what she could be thinking. i could
not believe that kim could ever be attractive enough as a man to
attract the likes of the gay man i saw. such a sexy woman could not
possibly make the kind of masculine, muscular man that gay men tend
to prefer. i silently predicted that kim would come to her senses, let
her man go, and embrace the femme fatale she was well on her way to
becoming. so far, i am half right. kim is no longer seen with him, and
she is still a nascent woman, but she has not yet gotten surgery.
kim’s story shows that sex reassignment is not necessarily an inevitable, unwavering goal for the homosexual transsexual. rather, sex
reassignment has a rational choice component: “can i make it? will i
be happier as a female? will i be more successful getting straight men
as a woman than i am at getting gay men as a man?” (the last decision
has to be weighted by a particular transsexual’s degree of preference
for straight versus gay men. most vastly prefer straight men.) this
could help explain why the large majority of boys who start out look-



in search of womanhood and men

183

ing transsexual ultimately do not pursue sex reassignment. some doubt
they can be attractive women.
this is a significant difference between the homosexual and
autogynephilic types. in making the decision whether to undergo sex
reassignment, the autogynephiles do not seem to dwell much on
whether they can attract mates. even autogynephiles who worry that
they cannot pass as women are concerned more about stares at the
grocery store than about a lack of stares at the cocktail lounge. this
makes sense. the autogynephile’s main romantic target is herself. this
is also consistent with my intuition that autogynephilia is a very internally driven condition, much less susceptible to the kind of rational
analysis that homosexual transsexuals seem to engage in.
*********
alma is a 40-year-old latina homosexual transsexual who got her
sex change in her mid-30s—quite late for the homosexual type. she
looks great, and works as a call girl out of her condo, which she owns.
alma has seen more than one era of transsexuals. her brother (whom
she calls her “sister”—there is no avoiding this kind of confusion) was
also a transsexual, who saw the heyday of new york’s studio 54 before
dying of aids in the early 1980s. alma has seen many a transsexual
come and go, and the first thing that she thinks of that most have in
common is that they are outcasts.they are outcasts as children because
of their extreme femininity. they mostly come from poor, broken
families, and family rejection is common. the gay community rejects
transsexuals, according to alma, because “they’re jealous that we get to
have sex with straight men.”
alma has also noticed, as i have, the large number of latina transsexuals. in chicago, there are several bars that cater to latina transsexuals. about 60 percent of the homosexual transsexuals and drag
queens we studied were latina or black. the proportion of nonwhite
subjects in our studies of ordinary gay men is typically only about 20
percent. alma says she thinks that hispanic people might have more



184

the man who would be queen

transsexual genes than other ethnic groups do. another transsexual,
remarking on the same phenomenon, attributed it to ethnic gender
roles: “my culture is very macho and intolerant of female behavior in
men. it is easier just to become a woman.”
i am not sure about the validity of all of alma’s observations, much
less her theories, but there is clearly something to the idea that homosexual transsexuals are used to living on the margins of society. they
have, in fact, had to learn to cope with rejection and disapproval since
childhood, because of their extreme femininity. and they have not
had the advantages that tend to instill respect in the social order. the
early chaotic backgrounds of so many homosexual transsexuals might
help explain why they do not defeminize the way that most very
feminine boys do. a feminine boy from a middle-class or uppermiddle-class family (such as danny’s) has more motivation to “hang in
there” until he normalizes his gender role behavior, because he has a
good chance at a conventionally successful future. defeminization
might also require more ambition and family support than some homosexual transsexuals possess.
most homosexual transsexuals have also learned how to live on
the streets. at one time or another many of them have resorted to
shoplifting or prostitution or both. this reflects their willingness to
forgo conventional routes, especially those that cost extra time or
money. homosexual transsexuals tend to have a short time horizon,
with certain pleasure in the present being worth great risks for the
future.
prostitution is the single most common occupation that homosexual transsexuals in our study admitted to. about half of them have
worked as prostitutes at some point. in chicago, the entry-level position is as a female-impersonating streetwalker who works the area of
broadway that is mostly gay after dark. (their customers, of course, are
not gay men.they are either unwary straight men or men looking for
she-males.) this kind of prostitution is dangerous, especially for transsexuals, whose customers sometimes do not know what they are.they



in search of womanhood and men

185

often form relationships with street hustlers or ex-cons. the rate of
hiv infection among transsexual streetwalkers is very high, partly due
to the high rate of intravenous drug use.
the more resourceful and attractive transsexual prostitutes are call
girls. before their sex reassignment surgery, they advertise as transsexuals. there is, in fact, a market for the services of preoperative transsexual prostitutes, and i will discuss this later. after surgery, many
transsexual call girls continue in the business. alma’s friend, juanita,
is a very attractive postoperative transsexual who has worked as a
call girl both before and since her operation. juanita differs from
genetic female prostitutes because she asks men to describe themselves on the phone before she makes an appointment with them. in
doing so, she is trying to determine whether their appearance will be
acceptable to her. for example, she rejects obese men. she also admits
that she finds some of the men who patronize her attractive, and enjoys sex with them. she doesn’t tell them, though, because she doesn’t
want them to try to get sex for free. although juanita says she would
like to switch occupations, she does not feel degraded and guilty about
what she does for a living. i suspect that this reflects an aspect of her
psychology that has remained male. when we ask transsexuals about
their level of interest in casual sex, they respond pretty much like gay
men and straight men, all of whom are more interested than either
lesbians or straight women, on average. although juanita is so feminine in some respects, even some behavioral respects, her ability to
enjoy emotionally meaningless sex appears male-typical. in this sense,
homosexual transsexuals might be especially well suited to prostitution.
as for shoplifting, homosexual transsexuals are not especially well
suited as much as especially motivated. for many, their taste in clothing is much more expensive than their income allows.transsexual call
girls are among the few who can afford expensive clothes. in female
impersonator shows, transsexuals often wear designer gowns, which
are widely believed (by other transsexuals) to have been acquired via
the five-fingered discount.



186

the man who would be queen

living on the edge is more out of necessity than desire. most of
the homosexual transsexuals i talked to had similar dreams for the
future. they wanted to get their surgery (if they had not yet had it)
and meet a nice, attractive, and financially stable heterosexual man
who would marry and take care of them. this is obviously similar to
the hopes of many non-transsexual women. when i was conducting
my study of homosexual transsexuals, i routinely asked them if they
knew anyone who had realized this dream. no one did.
*********
the baton is chicago’s premier female impersonator club, featuring several past miss continentals, including the gorgeous mimi marks.
the performances consist of lip-synching and dancing to well-known
songs, and the intended effect is to awe the audience with the beauty
and realism of the female impersonators, who all appear to be women.
mission accomplished. even the less attractive performers are not so
because they look like men, but rather, because they are overweight, or
merely plain. they look like women. all the performers i met there
label themselves transsexual, and they all love men. they also all still
have their penises. once they have their sex reassignment surgery, they
become women, and women cannot impersonate women.
my first time at the baton, i too was wowed by the accomplished
female impersonations. but the most interesting part of the experience involved the audience. one man who sat close to the stage, by
himself, was the object of derision by the transsexual mc and several
of the other performers, during their acts. the performers made gestures indicating that he was dirty or perverse, while the man gazed up
at them, seemingly unfazed. at one break, i overheard one of the
performers telling him, exasperated, “of course i still have it!” only
later, when i spoke to several homosexual transsexuals about it, was i
able to surmise what was going on. none of the transsexuals i asked
had difficulty interpreting the interaction. it was evidently in the realm
of experience of all of them, in one way or another.



in search of womanhood and men

187

the man was at the baton because he was especially attracted to
she-males, or transsexuals who live as women but still have their penises. she-males are most often depicted as mostly feminine individuals, with women’s faces, breasts, and absence of facial and body hair,
but with functioning and erect penises. she-males are not just an acceptable substitute to this man. they are his preferred targets. evidently, there is a significant market for she-male sex. advertisements
in pornographic magazines often sell videos or other magazines featuring she-males. about half of the homosexual transsexuals i have
met have worked as prostitutes, and the majority of these worked preoperatively as she-males. one study found that among prostitutes’ solicitations in a toronto alternative newspaper, about one in twenty was
placed by a preoperative transsexual prostitute.
who are the customers? are they gay, straight, or bisexual? are
they merely men looking for something exotic? ray blanchard is the
only researcher who has studied men who are sexually attracted to
she-males. (blanchard calls men with sexual interest in she-males
“gynandromorphophiles.” cher calls them “transie sniffers.” i will stick
with “men with sexual interest in she-males.”) in a content analysis of
sexual personals advertisements, he found that about half of men who
sought she-males were cross-dressers. blanchard thinks that a significant number of men who want she-males are “partial autogynephiles”—they are primarily aroused to the image of themselves as shemale. blanchard says that the men are not gay but are more like
“scrambled up heterosexual men.” the transsexuals i know who
worked as she-male prostitutes confirmed this. “there was nothing
gay about those men,” said one, who knows plenty about gay men.
there is a rather uneasy symbiosis between the homosexual shemales, on their way to sex reasssignment, and the men who want them
at that stage. juanita, who has been a successful prostitute before and
after sex reassignment surgery, says simply “you would have to be
crazy to prefer being a she-male prostitute.” according to juanita, there
were several problems with customers who call on she-males. most



188

the man who would be queen

annoyingly, they frequently don’t show up for the appointments they
scheduled. she thinks the no-shows want something exotic but simply
lose their nerve and decide they can’t go through with it. another
thing that irritated juanita about the customers who called on her
when she was a she-male was the way they viewed her. “they considered me their little sex toy and assumed that just because i was a
transsexual i would do anything kinky. they didn’t care about me, or
even what i looked like. they just wanted to know if my thing
worked.” juanita says that the most frequent unwelcome requests were
that she would penetrate them anally, act like a dominatrix, or allow
them to cross-dress with her. the most frequent activity that she
granted was oral sex (the men sucked juanita’s penis).
juanita has had her sex reassignment surgery, and now works as a
call girl for men who want real women. she does not tell them that
she used to be a transsexual. none of her frequent customers from
before was interested in continuing with her, post-surgery. the new
men are more “intimate,” according to juanita, because they see her as
a real person rather than merely a “sex toy.” juanita is a very attractive
transsexual, and had the luxury of continuing to work successfully
even after she was no longer exotic. although i have not met one,
some she-male prostitutes allegedly delay sex reassignment surgery
because they are concerned that their incomes will suffer after they no
longer have their penises.
*********
the voice on my answering machine sounded serious, even worried, and i wondered why. maria had seemed ready and eager for her
surgery. she was one of the few homosexual transsexuals i had met
who had a conventional job; she was cheerful and not at all ambivalent
about the surgery. she knew what she wanted. when i called her
back, she asked to meet at a restaurant in lincoln park, chicago’s
trendy urban neighborhood. when i arrived, she greeted me at the
door, and i barely recognized her. she had been quite passable before,



in search of womanhood and men

189

but not especially attractive. now she was the kind of woman that
men gawk at (and later when we left the restaurant, they did). she now
had very large breasts and an hourglass figure. her face, which showed
light stubble before, was radiantly feminine now. and she had already
had one of the best voices i had ever heard on a transsexual. yet she
began by saying she had problems.
wherever she went, maria was constantly feeling that people were
whispering about her, identifying her as a transsexual. i was quite certain that people were whispering about her, but equally certain that
they were not “clocking” her (detecting her status as a transsexual).
then she revealed her current personal situation, which helped explain her paranoia. for over a year she had had a steady boyfriend who
did not know that she is a transsexual. she had made up a past life in
response to his queries. her gay brother collaborated with her to convince her boyfriend of the truth of her false past and to hide the true
past. she was extremely concerned that her boyfriend would find out,
and the constant worry caused tension in their relationship. for example, she was jealous that he would seek a “real woman,” although in
fact he believed he was already with a “real woman,” and they had
been fighting.
maria had met her boyfriend shortly after getting breast implants
but before her vaginoplasty. evidently, many men had made advances
at that time, and she chose him because he was good looking and
ambitious. she was able to postpone intercourse with him for a few
months, meanwhile frantically managing to get her surgery scheduled
sooner. she had sex with him sooner than she was supposed to, but
had not had any physical problems as a result. her new body worked
well.
she and her boyfriend had talked fairly specifically about a future,
including marriage and children. although aware that she cannot have
children, she was willing to adopt. the boyfriend had integrated her
into his circle of friends and introduced her to his family, who loved
her. maria had absolutely no intention of telling her boyfriend, ever.



190

the man who would be queen

she had cut off, or at least drastically reduced, interactions with her
old transsexual friends to reduce the chance of discovery, but had a
couple of close calls in public with her boyfriend, once with cher.
some of her old friends understood and wished her well; others did
not. in fact, maria worried that a resentful transsexual might track
down her boyfriend and tell him merely to spoil things for her.
as we spoke, i sympathized with maria, but i also pondered her
and her boyfriend’s predicaments. maria’s is clear enough. ray
blanchard once presented the following dilemma to a prominent and
open-minded heterosexual male scientist. suppose that you met the
perfect woman—attractive, sexy, and interested in you—with one
catch: she is transsexual. would you be her partner? the scientist
sheepishly admitted that he would not.when i asked juanita, the sexy
transsexual prostitute (now post-op, and not generally open about her
past) about the best, and worst, reactions she had had from lovers after
she revealed that she used to be a man, she replied “i have really never
had a good experience. the men always leave.” juanita’s most recent
boyfriend confronted her after penetrating her for the first time. her
vagina is shallow, and he concluded that she is not a normal woman.
he asked if she is transsexual, and she did not deny it. he ran from her
apartment and called her later to say that he could not deal with her
revelation just now. she has not heard back from him. juanita knows
only one transsexual who has been with a man for more than a year,
and that transsexual’s boyfriend pimps for her.
all the homosexual transsexuals i have talked to say that they wish
they could find a man they could tell and who would love them
anyway, but they all worry that such a man does not exist. and they are
all deeply suspicious of men who prefer transsexuals to real women.
(these men have something similar to “sexual interest in she-males,”
and transsexuals find them weird.) there is little incentive for the
postoperative homosexual transsexual to be honest.
cher has made it clear to her friends, such as juanita, that she
disapproves of such deception, and that she intends to be honest with
her own prospects. (cher currently considers herself bisexual, but



in search of womanhood and men

191

thinks that she is most likely to become sexually involved with men.)
press her, though, and she will admit that virtue is somewhat easier for
her than for her homosexual transsexual friends. cher is sufficiently
“clockable” that she cannot risk not telling. before she says anything,
most men know, or at least suspect. furthermore, i do not believe that
cher’s attraction to men is as intense or as unambiguous as that of
homosexual transsexuals. she is autogynephilic, and men’s place in her
sexual world is complicated. so the loss of a potential sex partner is less
of a loss, overall, to cher than it is to the homosexual transsexuals,
who simply lust after men.
i put myself in maria’s boyfriend’s place and ask myself if i would
want to know. the answer is less clear the longer i contemplate. on
the one hand, any person to whom it mattered would seem to have
the right to know. on the other hand, this is a man who by all accounts is in love with maria, and who derives a great deal of satisfaction from being with her. (my impression is that his friends and family
believe he is very lucky to be with her.) even though the couple (if it
remains a couple) is destined to be biologically childless, this is less of a
problem for most men than for most women, who often become
depressed when a couple is infertile. by the kind of utilitarian analysis
i am partial to, let us ask which ending would leave the world a happier place: the boyfriend finds out, or he doesn’t find out. assuming
that the couple is destined to break up for other reasons (after all, they
are only in their early 20s), then surely it is better for both if he does
not find out. if they are compatible enough to make a life together,
then it is still not clear that he should know. after all, she could eventually reveal that she is sterile without saying why. if having biological
children were so important to him, he could end the relationship with
only that knowledge.
maria asked me to talk to her and her boyfriend, to do couples
counseling, pretending that i have known her only as a woman. this
would serve both the goals of helping their relationship and covering
her story. i considered it briefly, then refused. but it was not an easy
decision.



autogynephilic
and homosexual
transsexuals:
how to tell them apart

o

nce you have learned about autogynephilic and homosexual transsexuals and seen several of each,
distinguishing them is easy. if blanchard and i saw the same 100
transsexuals, i would be surprised if we disagreed on more than 2. but
most readers will not have met a single transsexual of either type, and
even most clinicians who see gender patients are not used to thinking
about them this way. in any case, you cannot simply ask someone
“which type are you?”
i have devised a set of rules that should work even for the novice
(though admittedly, i have not tested them). start at zero. ask each
question, and if the answer is “yes,” add the number (+1 or -1) next to
the question. if the sum gets to +3, stop; the transsexual you’re talking
to is autogynephilic. if the sum gets to -3, she is homosexual.
+1 have you been married to a woman?

192



autogynephilic and homosexual transsexuals

193

+1 as a child, did people think you were about as masculine as
other boys?
+1 are you nearly as attracted to women as to men? or more
attracted to women? or equally uninterested in both? (add 1 if “yes”
to any of these.)
+1 were you over the age of 40 when you began to live full time
as a woman?
+1 have you worn women’s clothing in private and, during at
least three of those times, become so sexually aroused that you masturbated?
+1 have you ever been in the military or worked as a policeman
or truck driver, or been a computer programmer, businessman, lawyer,
scientist, engineer, or physician?
-1 is your ideal partner a straight man?
-1 as a child, did people think you were an unusually feminine
boy?
-1 does this describe you? “i find the idea of having sex with
men very sexually exciting, but the idea of having sex with women is
not at all appealing.”
-1 were you under the age of 25 when you began to live full
time as a woman?
-1 do you like to look at pictures of really muscular men with
their shirts off?
-1 have you worked as a hairstylist, beautician, female impersonator, lingerie model, or prostitute?
finally, if the person has been on hormones for at least six months,
ask yourself this question:
if you didn’t already know that this person was a transsexual, would
you still have suspected that she was not a natural-born woman?
+1 if your answer is “yes” (if you would have suspected)
-1 if your answer is “no”



194

the man who would be queen

keep in mind that people don’t always tell the truth. this interview could be invalid if the transsexual is actually autogynephilic but
is either (a) worried that you will think badly of her or deny her a sex
change if you know the truth, or (b) obsessed with being a “real”
woman.



chapter

11

becoming a woman

t

he medical transitioning of transsexuals, from men to women (and
the other way, too), is no longer just
a curiosity, but a business. if not a big business, it is at least a lucrative
business for a few surgeons, who devote their entire practices to it.
some of them have their own internet websites and distribute videos
that describe their services and show their results. it seems to be a
rapidly advancing specialty, as well. cher, who had her genital sex
change surgery only eight years ago, notes somewhat enviously that
neo-vaginas now look so much more realistic, complete with realisticlooking (and sensitive) clitorises, and labia. advances are surely driven
in large part by the free flow of information. few brain surgery patients study their options more closely than do transsexuals, who trade
not only opinions but also stories and pictures, both informally and on
websites. (next to a close-up photograph of a neo-vagina spread by
the patient’s fingers: “this is a fairly typical dr. m. result, with a well-

195



196

the man who would be queen

defined clitoris and nice thin labia.the urethral opening here is a little
lower and harder to see than in some examples: dr. m. seems to be
trimming his urethras shorter recently.”) the high-tech websites are
nearly all maintained by autogynephilic transsexuals, but homosexual
transsexuals spread the word about the same surgeons, and the
surgeon’s office is one place where homosexual and autogynephilic
transsexuals might well meet. here are the main medical procedures
that male-to-female transsexuals undergo, in rough chronological order in which they are typically undertaken, with rough costs.
start with electrolysis, to get rid of the beard. (electrolysis of body
hair is a lower priority, because it recedes some with hormonal treatment and in any case can be hidden.) autogynephiles prefer to do this
while still in the male role. homosexual transsexuals, because they are
younger and possibly have less facial hair to begin with, tend to switch
roles first. weekly time can range between one to more than five
hours at $40 to $100 per hour. completion may require less than 100
to more than 700 hours, with an average between 200 and 300 hours.
typical total electrolysis costs range between $4,000 and $16,000.
recently, some surgeons have recommended getting electrolysis on
the scrotum between the legs, as well, because this skin is often used to
line the neo-vagina, and should be hair-free. electrolysis hurts and
leaves red blotches on the skin for a while after each session.
next, hormones. female hormones (synthetic or “natural” estrogens, the latter taken from animal urine) are taken either orally, by
transdermal skin patch, or by injection, for the rest of the transsexual’s
life—assuming that she goes all the way. also, while the transsexual
still has her testes, she usually must take some kind of anti-androgen
hormone as well; this can be discontinued after she is castrated (which
usually happens during sex reassignment surgery). hormone therapy
is not typically very expensive—less than a couple of dollars per day—
and can be had either through a physician or without a prescription in
mexico or even by mail order via the internet.
if given early enough, hormones prevent masculinization of facial



becoming a woman

197

and body hair, and facial and body skeletal structures. early enough for
complete prevention is prior to puberty, and this does not happen in
this country. (in the very liberal netherlands, hormone therapy to
delay puberty sometimes is given in early adolescence.) but even in
the late teens and early twenties, hormone therapy can prevent a significant amount of masculinization that would otherwise occur. this
is one reason why homosexual transsexuals tend to be more convincing as women compared with autogynephilic transsexuals, who tend
to be older before starting hormones.
hormone therapy causes breast growth that is typically about one
or two cup sizes less than sisters and mothers reach. male sex drive
decreases (and this is often experienced as a relief). fat is redistributed,
causing the face to assume a more feminine shape. fat leaves the waist
and moves toward the hips and buttocks. body hair growth slows,
becomes less dense and lighter colored (but not on the head, face, or
pubic area). many transsexuals say that female hormones make them
feel better, and less depressed. some transsexuals say that female hormones make them behave more female-like. some say that it makes
them more attracted to men, for example, and cher believes that female hormones make her hold a cup like a woman rather than like a
man. some of these psychological “effects” of hormone therapy are
probably placebo effects, although it is not unlikely that others are real.
the worst potential side effect of hormone therapy is blood clots that
can travel to the lungs, where they can be fatal. luckily, this side effect
is rare.
with electrolysis and hormones, the other thing to get started on
early is the voice. female hormones do not feminize the male voice,
once it has changed.the voice is a big hindrance to many transsexuals
in their quest to pass. it is particularly difficult to pass on the phone,
when they cannot convey their otherwise (in many cases) very feminine presentation. the medical solution to the voice problem, “voice
surgery,” involves tightening of the vocal cords so that the pitch of the
voice is elevated. it is convenient to get a tracheal shave at the same



198

the man who would be queen

time (adam’s apple reduction), for a total of $4,500 or more. however,
voice surgery is still not considered very reliable—it has produced too
many bad outcomes, such as hoarsenes—and most transsexuals opt for
a few sessions with a voice therapist. the voice therapist teaches ways
to sound more like a woman.the most important and obvious focus is
raising the pitch of the voice to be as high as possible. singing is good
practice for this. even aside from pitch, men and women talk differently. women have more jumps in frequency than men, conveying a
more singsong effect. they have more precise articulation. they ask
more questions and talk about feelings more. in my experience, the
transsexual voice remains the most problematic piece of the feminine
puzzle. i have met many transsexuals whose physical appearance does
not give them away, but i have met only a few whose voice provides
no clue.
get rid of the beard, grow long hair, and put on a dress and even
with good breast growth, some transsexuals look like men in dresses.
male and female faces differ, and everyone sees the face. men, especially older men, have higher hairlines, broader chins, “brow bossing”
(a prominence of the male brow ridge), lower eyebrows, narrower
cheeks, and more prominent, angular noses. all these masculine features can be somewhat feminized with surgery. facial plastic surgery
is expensive, potentially the most expensive thing that a transsexual
will buy. total costs can exceed $30,000, but this varies greatly. some
transsexuals (especially the homosexual type) need relatively little, and
others need a lot of work.
although hormones cause some breast growth, many transsexuals
elect to get breast implants as well. homosexual transsexuals almost
invariably do this, and their tastes run large. they want to be noticed.
(one homosexual transsexual i know got her sex-change surgery several months earlier than she had originally planned because after she
got her breast implants, she immediately obtained a boyfriend who
wanted to have sex. another told me that the most unrealistic aspect
of the portrayal of dil, the transsexual in the crying game, was that she



becoming a woman

199

had not managed feminine breasts.) this surgery is well known to
genetic women these days, and costs about $5,000. one surgeon offers
a discount if the implants are done at the same time as genital surgery
(not recommended by some, because there is then no comfortable
part of the body to put weight on). more than one transsexual told me
that the aftermath of breast implant surgery was far more painful than
that of genital surgery.
women’s hips and bottoms are wider than men’s, so some transsexuals get silicon injections there. silicon injections can be dangerous.
silicon can enter the bloodstream and travel to the lungs, causing a
fatal embolism. also, because the silicon is loose rather than enclosed
in surgical implants, there is concern that the silicon will eventually
migrate to other places and look bad. (i have been unable to find
anyone to whom this has happened, but it is well documented in the
medical literature.) many people consider physicians who administer
silicon injections to be disreputable. homosexual transsexuals have
more motivation to attract men in the short term and seem less concerned with long-term consequences, so they are more apt to get the
silicon injections. ideally, these should be done in series, waiting for
each layer to harden before putting another one on. currently in chicago, the person who does this procedure for most transsexuals is,
herself, a transsexual who works out of her apartment. facial injections cost $125, hips $600, and bottoms $400.
the most exotic procedure—though not necessarily the most expensive—is vaginoplasty, or the construction of a neo-vagina.there is
more than one way to accomplish this. in any method, the first step is
to remove the testicles and the erectile tissue (insides) of the penis. a
“vaginal” cavity is created between the urethra (urinary tube) and the
rectum. in the most common form of the operation, the penile skin is
inverted to form the lining of the neo-vagina. if the patient has a short
penis (less than 5 inches), the surgeon can graft skin onto the new
vagina to lengthen it. (if the scrotum has been cleared of hair by electrolysis, this skin can be used.) the glans (head) of the penis is used to



200

the man who would be queen

construct the clitoris. because the glans contains the nerves that produce most of the penis’s erotic sensations, the neo-clitoris is usually
sensitive (just as a genetic woman’s is). a part of the scrotum is used to
make the labia (vaginal lips). these days, the best surgeons offer a
second, optional, labiaplasty operation, in which the labia are thinned
and a clitoral hood is formed, making the overall appearance generally
more realistic. the most interesting variation in the procedures i have
outlined is that some surgeons can use a segment of bowel tissue to
line the vagina. according to some reports, this makes the vagina
lubricate naturally, but this kind of vaginoplasty is more expensive and
carries a greater risk of complications. typical vaginoplasty fees range
from less than $8,000 to more than $15,000, and some surgeons charge
as much as $30,000. the optional labiaplasty is only about $3,000.
after the big operation, the patient must stay in a hospital for about
three days (included in the total cost), and when she can, she must
dilate her new vagina regularly, with dildo-like plastic rods.
i suspect that 10 years from now, this section of the book will have
to be much longer to provide even superficial coverage of available
options. and some of the procedures i have described will seem primitive by comparison. but even in the recent past, desperate transsexuals
without much money have been subject to far more rudimentary and
dangerous surgery by quacks eager to exploit them. one notorious
doctor, john ronald brown, was named one of the nation’s worst
surgeons by vogue in the late 1970s, served time for illegal medical
activities, then reopened his sex change shop in tijuana. transgender
activist dallas denny, who wrote an exposé on brown, described the
“tijuana experience”:
many of the transsexual people who went to mexico for gender reassignment surgery in the seventies and eighties wound up mutilated, with genitalia looking like they belonged to one of the creatures in the bar scene in
“star wars,” and not like something likely to be found on a human being of
either gender. some of these people, expecting vaginoplasties, received
simple penectomies, leaving them looking somewhat like a barbie doll.
others ended up with something that looked like a penis that had been



becoming a woman

201

split and sewn to their groin—which is essentially what had been done.
some ended up with vaginas which were lined with hair-bearing scrotal
skin; these vaginas quickly filled up with pubic hair, becoming inflamed and
infected. some ended up with peritonitis, some with permanent colostomies. some ran out of money and were dumped in back alleys and parking
lots to live or die. some died in those parking lots or back in the states, of
complications from the surgery.

in 1998 brown was arrested for performing an illegal amputation
that led to the death of an elderly man. speculation is that the man
had an “amputee fetish” (yes, this exists, and can be explored thoroughly on the internet) and found brown after legitimate surgeons
refused him.
*********
sex reassignment surgery is the easy part. the difficult part for
many transsexuals is the social transition that usually precedes surgery
by several years, and that continues for years afterwards.this transition
is especially difficult for autogynephilic transsexuals, and is worst for
those with wives and children and jobs that require them to interact
with the public. most physicians and mental health professionals who
work with transsexuals adhere to the standards of care for gender
identity disorders, promulgated by the harry benjamin international
gender dysphoria association (named for the revered father of
transsexualism). among other things, the standards of care specify
that prior to medical treatment (such as hormones or sex reassignment
surgery), transsexuals must participate in “real-life experience,” living
full time as the sex they will become.
the clarke institute of psychiatry has a very conservative real-life
experience requirement. transsexuals who want to become women
must first live for a year as women before receiving hormone therapy.
(this is motivated by concern for genetic females who want to become men. once they receive testosterone, their voices will permanently deepen. genetic men who receive female hormones do not
risk analogous permanent effects. however, blanchard does not want



202

the man who would be queen

to risk accusations of gender bias, so he holds both female-to-male
and male-to-female transsexuals to the same requirements.) during
this time, they must work, volunteer 20 hours a week, or attend school
full time, while maintaining a female identity. they must submit
proof—either tax forms or letters from bosses or supervisors—that
they are known by an unambiguously female name. “pat” would not
count; “patricia” would. once they begin hormone therapy, transsexual patients must live for another year (two total) as women before
receiving official authorization for sex reassignment surgery. currently,
the clarke institute arranges to have successful applicants’ sex reassignment surgeries performed in england by surgeons blanchard
thinks are top notch.
many transsexuals find the clarke institute’s lengthy real-life experience requirement to be onerous. they believe they should be eligible for hormones and surgery much sooner. there have even been a
few cases in which impatient patients mutilated their own genitals.
(these have all been autogynephiles, according to blanchard.) indeed,
there is no hard evidence in favor of the clarke’s policy. (to get hard
evidence, one would have to randomly assign transsexuals either to the
two years of real-life experience or to a shorter requirement, and then
follow them up to see which group fared better. no one has done
this.) there is new evidence that transsexuals who have had real-life
experiences as short as six months can do fine after surgery. still, the
clarke gender staff thinks the two year period is a good idea. blanchard
simply believes that the likelihood of regrets is too high with a shorter
period. maxine petersen emphasizes the importance of learning:“the
feeling of belonging to a different gender and the actual experience of
what it is like to belong or to live in that gender role and be accepted
as female are quite different. until one has done it the idealized existence is likely to dominate.” in part, petersen is referring to experiences that all women confront, such as being patronized by garage
mechanics. she is also referring to transsexual-specific experiences.
many transsexuals will have to contend for the rest of their lives with



becoming a woman

203

other peoples’ stares, smirks, and whispers, and a real-life experience
presents them with the opportunity to know if they can live with that.
most homosexual male-to-female transsexuals do not know about
the standards of care, much less attempt to adhere to them.yet even
for them, there must be an ultimate decision to stop using a male
identity and to adopt a female identity full time. my impression is that
this is an easier, less traumatic transition for them than for the
autogynephiles. for example, most homosexual transsexuals i talked to
felt sufficiently confident about their appearance when they
transitioned full time that this was not a source of major discomfort.
on the contrary, by the time they go full time, most homosexual
transsexuals have had feedback—from other transsexuals and from
straight men—that they can pull it off. the two groups most likely to
have problems with their transition—family and employers—are less
difficult for homosexual transsexuals. homosexual transsexuals are
more likely to be estranged from their families, in which case they care
less what their families think. and whether or not they are estranged
from them, the families are hardly likely to be completely surprised by
the homosexual transsexuals’ decisions. more often, parents and siblings will react with “what took you so long?” as for work, homosexual transsexuals are less likely to hold conventional jobs, and those
that do would have been recognized as being quite feminine and undoubtedly gay long before their transition.
in contrast, many autogynephilic transsexuals have both families
and employers who will be shocked and disturbed by their decision.
although the autogynephile’s wife often knows about his crossdressing, she has typically discounted the possibility that this would
lead to her husband’s becoming a woman, often due to his assurance.
(early in their marriage, he probably doubted that this would occur,
too.) their children typically have no clue. because the autogynephile
is not usually outwardly feminine and has conducted his cross-dressing
secretly, his coworkers and boss have probably never suspected anything either. for these men, there is no avoiding a crisis, one that
usually causes profound alterations in their lives.



204

the man who would be queen

some autogynephilic transsexuals would like to diminish the
trauma of transition by easing into it. it is not uncommon for them to
request gender clinics to allow them to gradually feminize their bodies, becoming increasingly androgynous, and change their female identities only after most people start treating them as women. some actually attempt this—petersen says that one such sign is an otherwise
unremarkably masculine man who begins wearing clear nail polish.
the clarke institute does not count such gender “blurring” toward
the two years of real-life experience. the concern is that it avoids
precisely the kind of information that transsexuals need—what it is
like to live as a woman. furthermore, petersen thinks that transsexuals
who try to adopt an ambiguous outward gender role might create
more of a sense of discomfort or confusion among others than the
actual transition would. instead, she recommends that before
transitioning, the transsexual should explicitly notify those who need
to know what is going on. at work, this should be the boss first.
“bosses don’t like hearing about this secondhand,” says petersen. increasingly, employers are behaving sympathetically toward their transsexual employees. the most difficult situations are those in which the
transsexual’s pre-transition job required a great deal of interaction with
the public (sales, for example). in this case, the employer might reasonably be concerned that the transsexual’s continued employment in
that position will cost the company business.
marriages usually end. individual wives’ reactions vary from sympathetic and understanding to angry and hateful, but even in the best
cases, women dislike the embarrassing notoriety and the loss of their
husbands. (after all, they are not lesbians.) as in all divorces, the degree
of animosity between parents is a major factor in how children come
to view the noncustodial parent. petersen thinks that it is important
for the transsexual parent (ideally, but not necessarily in alliance with
the other parent) to explain to the children before any transition, to
emphasize that it was nothing they caused, and that the transsexual
parent will continue to be a parent. this is an emotional issue for
petersen, because of her own experience. a postoperative transsexual,



becoming a woman

205

she has not seen her children since she transitioned socially into the
female role in 1991. when maxine petersen was a man, on the day he
planned to begin a slow process of talking to his children, gradually
explaining the transition to them and getting them used to the idea,
his then-wife talked to them first. although he spent several hours
with them afterwards, they were sufficiently traumatized that there
was no hope of reaching them. afterwards, the children told him they
did not want to see him anymore. petersen has called the children
regularly and remembered birthday and christmas presents, which she
leaves at the front door. she also writes them occasional long letters. “i
tell them that i love them and that the change has been only on the
outside. on the inside, i am the same person who raised them, read
them bedtime stories,” she says, tearfully. i believe her.
*********
different nations range widely in the compassion and assistance
given transsexuals. in the netherlands the government pays for sex
reassignment, even, in some cases, for adolescents. in canada, the government used to pay, provided the applicant was treated through the
clarke institute, but in 1998 the government ceased public funding. in
england, transsexuals cannot currently legally change their sex, though
they can get their medical expenses paid by national insurance. in
japan, sex reassignment surgery was not permitted until recently, when
the first case (a female changing to male) was sanctioned. islamic countries are especially intolerant. in malaysia, for example, 45 contestants
of a drag queen show were recently arrested for female impersonation;
needless to say, sex reassignment surgery is not subsidized there. in the
united states, of course, transsexuals can both obtain surgery and
change their legal sex. however, private insurance almost never pays
for the surgery, or for anything else involved in sex reassignment. private insurance companies are motivated to keep costs to a minimum,
and there are too few transsexuals to comprise a constituency to be
reckoned with.
almost certainly, refusal to cover sex reassignment surgery is also



206

the man who would be queen

motivated by moral ambivalence. my undergraduate students at
northwestern are surely more liberal than average (at least until they
get their first jobs or advanced degrees and begin to protect their
assets), but even most of them balk at the idea that the surgery should
be subsidized. they are especially hesitant to support surgery for
nonhomosexual transsexuals, once they learn about autogynephilia.
the idea of men sexually obsessed with having vaginas is incomprehensible to them, and like most americans, they are too puritanical to
give sexual concerns much priority in the public trough. but even
when i invoke the standard transsexual narrative—“imagine that you
have felt your entire life that you had the body of the wrong sex”—
they balk. when i press them, they say something like the following:
“but they don’t have the wrong body. they are mentally ill.”
paul mchugh, chairman of the department of psychiatry at johns
hopkins university, used a more sophisticated version of that argument to close hopkins’s renowned gender identity clinic. mchugh
objected that clinicians naively accepted transsexual patients’ histories
of having been quite feminine, when there was ample evidence in
many cases that the histories were false (for example, a married man
who presents as conventionally masculine).this objection is often correct, though it has no obvious relevance to the advisability of sex
reassignment. furthermore, and more importantly, mchugh argued
that it is simply wrong for physicians to “mutilate” perfectly good
organs because the transsexual patient’s troubled mind wants this:
“[the focus on surgery] has distracted effort from genuine investigations attempting to find out just what has gone wrong for these
people—what has, by their testimony, given them years of torment
and psychological distress and prompted them to accept these grim
and disfiguring surgical procedures.”
mchugh’s concerns are worth taking seriously. consider the case
of the man erotically obsessed with having his leg amputated.would it
be advisable or even ethical to remove the leg? and mchugh is correct that interest in sex reassignment medicine has far exceeded inter-



becoming a woman

207

est in changing the minds of transsexual people so that they do not
want to change their sex. transsexualism is, after all, a condition of the
mind and brain.
one problem with mchugh’s analysis is that we simply have no
idea how to make gender dysphoria go away. i suspect that both
autogynephilic and homosexual gender dysphoria result from early
and irreversible developmental processes in the brain. if so, learning
more about the origins of transsexualism will not get us much closer
to curing it. given our present state of knowledge, saying that we
should focus on removing transsexuals’ desire to change sex is equivalent to saying that it is better that they should suffer permanently from
gender dysphoria than that they obtain sex reassignment surgery.
surely the most relevant data are transsexuals’ own feelings before
and after transitioning. are they glad they did it? by now, hundreds of
transsexuals have been followed after changing sex, and the results are
clear. successful outcomes are much more common than unsuccessful
outcomes. in the typical study perhaps 80 percent of male-to-female
outcomes are judged successful, about 10 percent unsuccessful, and
about 10 percent uncertain. (the results of genetic females who
become men are even more successful.) “success” has been defined
differently by different investigators, and has included such things as
absence of regrets, and success in work and sexual relationships. no
one claimed that transsexuals were without problems, only that they
seemed to have adjusted well. furthermore, the few studies that had
adequate control groups found that as transition progressed through
hormones and then surgery, patients’ well-being also increased and
surpassed that of those waiting sex reassignment.
those patients who did have regrets tended to have had poor
surgical outcomes, work-related problems (for instance, dismissal because of transitioning), or poor functioning to begin with. there was
also some indication in a couple of studies that autogynephiles were
more likely to have regrets. in a late-1980s study by blanchard, about a
third of a small sample of nonhomosexual transsexuals had some re-



208

the man who would be queen

grets. both blanchard and petersen believe that the regrets rate among
autogynephiles would be much lower now because of greater tolerance among employers and a more cautious approach to recommending patients for surgery.
as vaginoplasty has become more and more sophisticated, transsexual patients undoubtedly have been increasingly satisfied. juanita
was initially unhappy with the look of her neo-vagina after phase one
surgery, but after the second phase, she was delighted. she had been
insecure that her partners would detect that her vagina was not real
before; now she doesn’t worry. in the past, neo-vaginas tended to be
shallow. in one study from the 1980s, they averaged about three inches,
and the researchers speculated that transsexuals who had sex with men
might use sexual positions that minimize depth of penetration. with
the recent trend of using skin grafts to lengthen the vagina, this is
becoming less of a concern, if it ever was one. none of the transsexuals
i met complained about vaginal depth. some of them—particularly
the homosexual transsexuals—had been concerned before sex reassignment surgery that they would lose erotic sensation and become
anorgasmic. and this does occur, though most transsexuals retain the
capacity for orgasm. in fact, several transsexuals claimed to me that for
the first time in their lives, they were experiencing multiple orgasms.
blanchard is skeptical about such accounts, because he suspects they
are trying to convince themselves or others that they are like genetic
women. however, they have convinced me that there is something
really going on. do they have multiple orgasms just like some genetic
women do? i am not sure, because as a man i cannot understand the
phenomenon; nor has it been well understood scientifically.
although there have been a number of follow-up studies of transsexuals, these studies have been quite limited in terms of their outcome measures, among other things. because of this, perhaps the best
indication that sex reassignment is usually successful is that transsexuals continue to seek it.they do not seek it blindly. on the contrary, as
i have mentioned, transsexuals are highly motivated and educated con-



becoming a woman

209

sumers of sex reassignment. many know the scientific literature, and
all of them closely question other transsexuals at more advanced stages
of transition. if, from their perspective, sex reassignment were a bad
idea—if transitioning routinely led to unhappiness—they would not
go through with it.
of course, there are other perspectives that deserve to be weighed.
most obviously, the wives and children of autogynephilic transsexuals
might well be less happy after their husbands and fathers change their
sex. i think their suffering is understandable and unfortunate. (i am
less sympathetic toward disapproving families of origin of homosexual
transsexuals, who do not depend on them.) however, i do not think
that this real suffering should be used to discourage transsexuals from
sex reassignment. most are plenty conscious of the suffering they might
cause their families and proceed, if they do, with regret about this. and
in a society in which nearly half of marriages end in divorce, often
caused primarily by boredom, it is difficult to understand why
autogynephilia is not sufficient reason to end a marriage.
*********
do transsexuals find partners? certainly, homosexual transsexuals
find sex partners after their surgery, but do they get steady partners?
do they get married? i have already mentioned my impression that
homosexual transsexuals are not very successful at finding desirable
men willing to commit to them. in part, this reflects the difficulty that
men have with the notion of coupling with women who used to be
men (no matter how attractive such women may be), as well as the
difficulty most transsexuals have keeping their secret. but it also reflects the choices that homosexual transsexuals are prone to make. my
impression is that they would rather have a relatively uncommitted
relationship with a very attractive man than a committed relationship
with a less desirable partner. although the homosexual transsexuals i
have met are all searching for “mr. right,” perhaps in vain, their sex
lives have all clearly improved after surgery. they can hide their past



210

the man who would be queen

identities for a while, at least, and so no longer have to worry about
how to respond to attractive men who hit on them in bars.
when i began writing this book, i had never known a homosexual transsexual who married. however, in 1999 juanita invited me
to her wedding. her engagement story was quite romantic, in an odd,
transsexual kind of way. she met her fiancé on the internet a couple of
years after her vaginoplasty. when they began dating, she didn’t tell
him her secret. they were on vacation in mexico, and he proposed.
she began her answer with, “there’s something i’ve been meaning to
tell you.” after she confessed, he was stunned, but he told her he
wanted to marry her anyway.
the wedding was small, touching, and hilarious. juanita’s family—mother, father, three brothers, and three sisters—all attended, and
of course, they knew that juanita used to be hector. as did the four
transsexuals, including cher, whom juanita invited. however, neither
the groom’s parents nor his son from his first marriage had any idea.
juanita was radiant, but when i spoke privately with her, she revealed
that she was having second thoughts about becoming stepmother to a
teenage boy and living in the suburbs. but she reminded herself what a
great catch her husband was.
just a year later cher told me that juanita and her husband were
separated. apparently, juanita’s doubts had only grown, and she missed
the excitement of living in the city, and of dating new partners. she
had also begun to work again as an escort—she had done this before
meeting her husband. juanita had achieved the dream that nearly all
the homosexual transsexuals i’ve met have told me they want, and she
let it go.
nearly all the homosexual transsexuals i know work as escorts
after they have their surgery. i used to think that somehow, they had
no other choice because conventionally happy lives were beyond their
grasp. i have come to believe that these transsexuals are less constrained
by their secret pasts than by their own desires. and these desires, including the desire for sex with different attractive men, do not make
conventional married life easier.



becoming a woman

211

autogynephilic transsexuals tend to lead very different sex lives
than homosexual transsexuals, both before and after surgery. autogynephiles are more likely to seek one single partner. a few remain
with their wives, though much more often, wives divorce them. a
significant number of autogynephiles find lesbian partners. it is not
uncommon for autogynephilic transsexuals to pair up with each other.
my impression is that a substantial proportion of autogynephilic transsexuals do not get partners (even casual sex partners) after their surgery. however, this doesn’t mean that in these cases sex reassignment
surgery has failed. autogynephilic transsexuals do not primarily seek
sex reassignment in order to attract partners.
*********
cher has been having a rough time lately. she has fallen out with
amy, a homosexual transsexual who used to be her closest friend.
cher thinks that once amy got her surgery, she no longer needed her,
and she feels used. when she goes out with juanita, who has become
her best friend, men are constantly approaching juanita (who is 15
years younger and very sexy), but they approach cher cautiously, if at
all. cher also admits that she is strongly attracted to both amy and
juanita (and i wonder if she has fallen in love with them). of course,
they have no romantic or sexual interest in her, or for anyone who is
not a man, and so her lust is unrequited. cher sounds depressed sometimes and worries that she will never find anyone. she is also broke,
and is being sued by her relatives for her father’s inheritance.
i ask her if she ever regrets becoming a woman, and she does not
hesitate. “no, that is one thing i know was right,” she says. “i do not
regret that, and i am not ashamed of anything.”
despite her troubles, she continues to visit her circle of (primarily
transsexual) friends, helping them plan their transition, listening to
their boyfriend problems, and urging them away from those areas of
transsexual life of which she disapproves—prostitution, for instance.
she is a good friend to them, although her advice is not always appreciated or heeded.



212

the man who would be queen

i think about what an unusual life she has led, and what an unusual person she is. how difficult it must have been for her to figure
out her sexuality and what she wanted to do with it. i think about all
the barriers she broke, and all the meanness that she must still contend
with. despite this, she is still out there giving her friends advice and
comfort, and trying to find love. and i think that in her own way,
cher is a star.



epilogue

i

recently met danny ryan for the
first time. although i had discussed
him several times with his mother,
danny had steadfastly refused to meet me. i believe that he associated
me with concern about his femininity, and he didn’t like to be reminded of this.
i met him by accident. i attended my university’s graduation ceremony, and danny’s family did as well. his parents—leslie and patrick
ryan—danny, and his sister were there in support of a family friend’s
daughter. i was there because it was my turn to represent our faculty at
convocation. after the ceremony, i passed them in a long hallway, and
leslie and i simultaneously noticed each other.
as leslie ryan introduced me to her family, i could not help
focusing my attention on danny. a slender boy with medium-length
(for a boy) light blonde hair, blue eyes, and fine features, he was impeccably dressed in a navy suit, red tie, and black shoes. as leslie intro-

213



214

the man who would be queen

duced him to me, i tried to notice his response, to see whether he
recognized my name. i couldn’t tell.
looking at danny, it was difficult to imagine him wearing high
heels and a dress. he looked good as a boy—if an unusually formally
dressed one. when the family friend’s daughter showed up, she told
him how handsome he looked, and he beamed. this was not a girl in
boy’s clothing.
as we congregated in the hallway, i watched danny interact. shy
at first, he whispered quietly to his sister. then someone asked him
about convocation. he cocked his head back dramatically, threw his
forearm across his eyes and said, “i thought it was entirely too long.
must they read every single name?” his word choice was obviously
unusual, for an eight-year-old boy, and his speech style was precise and
somewhat prissy. this was not a typical boy, either.
a few moments later, danny said: “mummy, i need to go to the
men’s room.” i am certain that as he said that, he emphasized “men’s”
and looked my way. and off he went, by himself. at that moment, i
became as certain as i can be of danny’s future.



further reading

chapter 1
the place to start is not a book but a film. the belgian film ma
vie en rose (my life in pink, alain berliner, sony pictures classics,
1997) is a startlingly effective portrayal of a very feminine boy. the
story is poignant and entertaining. see it.
chapter 2
richard green’s classic book, the ‘sissy boy syndrome’ and the development of homosexuality (new haven:yale university press, 1987) is
that rare combination of an important scholarly contribution and a
good read. for a more exhaustive (and academic) treatment, see gender identity disorder and psychosexual problems in children and adolescents
(new york: guilford press, 1995) by kenneth j. zucker and susan j.

215



216

the man who would be queen

bradley. for the conservative, anti-gay approach to atypical gender
identity, see george rekers’ writings on the national association for
research and therapy of homosexuality website (www.narth.com).
for the far-left approach, which criticizes even moderates like zucker,
read gender shock (new york: anchor, 1997) by phyllis burke.
chapter 3
as nature made him (new york: harper perennial, 2001), by john
colapinto, focuses on the famous case of david reimer, who lost his
penis in infancy and was raised unsuccessfully as a girl. man and woman,
boy and girl (baltimore: johns hopkins university press, 1973) is the
classic book by john william money and anke a. ehrhardt that summarizes the research from the 1950s and 1960s that was used to justify
the decision to reassign reimer as a girl.
chapter 4
the naked civil servant (new york: penguin, 1997), by quentin
crisp, is a wonderful book about gay femininity. it is the autobiography of crisp, who is the prototype of the queenie gay man. (in typical
british fashion, crisp was not as loud and dramatic as the stereotypic
american queen, but he otherwise fit the bill.) it is both hilarious and
insightful.
chapter 5
several books illuminate the world of gay casual sex. tearoom trade
(new york: aldine de gruyter, 1975), by laud humphreys, is a study
of men who engage in homosexual acts with strangers in public
restrooms. larry kramer’s controversial book, faggots (new york:
grove press, 2000), gives a harsh portrait of sexual excess among gay
men during the 1970s. and the band played on (new york: st. martin’s



further reading

217

press, 2000), by randy shilts, is about the aids epidemic, a tragic
consequence of gay promiscuity.
chapter 6
simon levay’s queer science (cambridge, massachussetts: mit
press, 1997) is an excellent introduction to the biology of sexual orientation. for genetics, dean hamer and peter copeland’s the science
of desire (new york: touchstone books, 1996) is a fine introduction.
whether or not hamer’s xq28 finding turns out to be correct, his
general knowledge about sexual orientation is excellent, and he is
witty and refreshingly outspoken.
chapter 7
the clearest exposition of the social constructionist case is edward stein’s the mismeasure of desire (new york: oxford university
press, 2001). the most influential books have included one hundred
years of homosexuality by david m. halperin (new york: routledge,
1989) and michel foucault’s opus the history of sexuality (new york:
vintage, 1990). but be warned that neither of these is easy (or in my
opinion, clear) to read. the historian rictor norton has written the
most thorough critique of social constructionist accounts of homosexuality: the myth of the modern homosexual (london: cassell academic, 1998).
chapters 8 and 9
the current popular literature on transsexualism is noteworthy in
its ignorance of the distinction between autogynephilic and homosexual transsexuals. the biographies and autobiographies of famous
transsexuals, including those of christine jorgensen (the christine
jorgensen story, susan stryker and christine jorgensen, chicago: cleis



218

the man who would be queen

press, 2000) and deirdre n. mccloskey (crossing: a memoir, chicago:
university of chicago press, 1999 ), focus on the standard transsexual
story (“i always felt like a female”), even though i would guess that
both jorgenson and mccloskey were autogynephilic. this is also true
of books about transsexualism and sex reassignment, such as true selves
(mildred l. brown and chloe ann rounsley, san francisco: josseybass, 1996). some exceptions include richard ekins’ male femaling
(new york: routledge, 1997), which provides an excellent sociological overview.
the book transvestites (buffalo, ny: prometheus press, 1991) shows
why magnus hirschfeld is a giant of twentieth-century sexology. look
at case #12, especially, to see that hirschfeld understands something
about autogynephilia, long before blanchard nailed the concept down.
ray blanchard has, unfortunately, written only for academic audiences. his most accessible treatment of autogynephilia might be
“clinical observations and systematic studies of autogynephilia,”
published in 1991 in the journal of sex and marital therapy (17(4): 235251).
anne lawrence maintains an awesome website for transsexuals,
transsexual women’s resources, (www.annelawrence.com/twr), and
one section of her site is devoted to autogynephilia. (see the “sexuality” link.) not only does she have clear explanations of autogynephilia,
but she also includes testimonials of transsexuals who have visited her
site and read about the concept. most of them are thankful that someone is finally talking about the sexual side of transsexualism. some say
they finally understand themselves. a few are angry with anne for
embracing blanchard’s “wrongheaded” ideas. anne’s essays on
autogynephilia have been translated into french, italian, and chinese
by grateful readers.
for an article that angered many autogynephiles—but which provides a sympathetic portrayal of both cross-dressers and their wives—
see amy bloom’s “conservative men, conservative dresses,” origi-



further reading

219

nally published in the atlantic monthly, april 2002, and included in her
collection normal (new york: random house, 2002).
chapter 10
the documentary film, paris is burning (jennie livingston,
miramax/nea, 1990), provides a sympathetic and accurate picture of
mostly african-american transsexuals and drag queens in new york
city. honey, honey, miss thang (philadelphia: temple university press,
1996), by leon e. pettiway, is a book treatment of a similar culture.
the film wigstock (barry shils, 1995) focuses more on drag performance than on life between performances, but it, too, is worth watching. the queen (frank simon, 1968) is an earlier documentary of a
drag contest that has several very funny moments along with some
poignant ones.
chapter 11
if you are considering a sex change from man to woman, the best
place to start is anne lawrence’s website (www.annelawrence.com/
twr), where you will get up-to-date information about procedures
used by different surgeons, as well as photographs of their work. she
also has sections on other relevant issues, such as voice feminization
and outcome research. as far as books go, miss vera’s finishing school
for boys who want to be girls (new york: doubleday, 1997), by veronica
vera, is instructive.





index

a

b

abbé de choisy, 171
abortion controversy, 114
adoptive brothers, 108
aids/hiv infection, 84, 86, 108,
110, 119, 120, 121, 162,
183, 185, 217
allen, laura, 119, 120
ambady, nalini, 73-74
american psychiatric association,
81
amputee fetish, 201, 206
anal sex, 57, 83-84, 128, 131, 148,
156, 188
anderson, clinton, 26
anxiety, 81-82
apostle paul, 128
archives of general psychiatry, 110
aristophanes, 128
artistic brother hypothesis, 117-118
autoerotic asphyxia, 172

bahuchara mata, 134
bawer, bruce, 100
behavior modification therapy, 2426, 28
bend over boyfriend (video), 83
benjamin, harry, 174, 201
bergling, tim, 59
bestiality, 171
birdcage,the (movie), 76, 77
birth order hypothesis, 111, 158
bisexuals and bisexuality, 95, 107,
108, 132, 133, 136, 159,
162
blanchard, ray, 157-159, 162,
165-167, 168, 169, 176,
186, 192, 201-202, 207208, 218
bloom, amy, 218-219
boston university, 106
boswell, john, 128

221



222

the man who would be queen

brain development
and gender identity
development, 44, 207
inah-1 and inah-3, 119122
sexual differentiation in, 7273, 118-122, 169
sexually dimorphic nucleus
(rats), 119-120
breedlove, marc, 123
british public schools, 125, 131,
132
brown, john ronald, 200
burke, phyllis, 26, 27
byne, bill, 121-122

c
canada, 205
casual sex, 86, 87-90, 101, 156,
185, 211, 216-217
catholic priests, 66, 69
centers for disease control and
prevention, 86
chase, cheryl, 174
chicago
baton, 186-187
gay district, 59-60, 63-64, 96,
128, 141, 142
childhood behavior
autogynephilic cross dressing,
170
awareness of unacceptability
of, 7-10
with cloacal exstropy, 41-42
feminine boys, x, 3-15, 18, 68,
147

male homosexuals, x-xi, 12,
13, 17, 19-20, 38, 58-59,
61-62, 68, 80-81
sexual knowledge, 34-35
childrearing practices. see
parenting behavior
clark institute of psychiatry, 157,
162, 163, 170, 172-173,
201, 204, 205
cloacal exstrophy
assessment of outcomes, 49-50
childhood behavior, 41-42
female assignment of males,
40-44, 47
and gender identity
development, 42-45, 47,
48-50, 51-52
male assignment of males, 51
and persecution and
stigmatization, 46
prevalence, 41
refusal of sex reassignment, 49
sex reassignment surgery, 4044, 47, 49, 51
and sexual orientation, 45, 46,
47, 48, 111
telling children about, 42-43,
51
cohen-kettenis, peggy, 32
corbett, ken, 26
creation myth, 128
crisp, quentin, 79, 84, 216
cross-dressing/cross-dressers
autoerotic asphyxia and, 172
in childhood, 3, 4, 6, 18, 147,
170



223

index
conditioning explanations,
169
counseling for, 164
by drag queens, 135, 159-160,
179-180
erotic component to, 152153, 157, 160-161, 163164, 170, 173, 174-175,
176
genetic link, 170, 172
guilt and purging, 153, 161,
171
heterosexual transvestites, 155,
160-161, 165
occupational, 135
sexual sadism and, 172
she-male prostitute customers,
187-188
stigmatization, 161
by transsexuals, 147, 148, 152153, 155, 159, 163-165,
168, 169-170, 173, 203,
218-219
crying game,the (movie), 79, 142,
198-199
cultural influences
feminine boys, 73
sexual behavior of male
homosexuals, 133-138
and transsexualism, 171, 183184

d
dancers, 67-69, 76
davidson, jaye, 79
denny, dallas, 200-201

depression, 81-82, 83, 155, 163
die transvestiten (hirschfeld), 171
dörner, gunter, 104-105
dominatrix, 188
drag queens, 72, 76, 135, 136, 155,
159-160, 179-180, 183,
205, 219

e
eating disorders, 82, 93
ed wood (movie), 142
egalitarian relationships, 134, 137138
estrogen therapy, 46, 48, 149, 196197
evolution
and age preferences in mates,
96-97
homosexuality as a paradox,
88, 115-118
and interest in casual sex, 8788
and visual sexual stimuli, 94
exhibitionism, 171

f
family relationships
feminine boys, 18-19, 26, 30,
37-38, 103
gay sons, 37, 98-99, 114-115
of transsexuals, 15, 20, 32,
149-150, 155-156, 183,
203, 204-205, 206, 209,
211
fathers, and feminine sons, x, 4, 6,
17, 19-20, 26, 37, 103



224

the man who would be queen

female impersonators, 185, 186187, 205
feminine boys
behavior modification therapy,
24-26, 28
causes attributed to, x, 10-12,
22-34, 39, 52-54, 111,
169; see also gender
identity disorder
childhood behavior and
experiences, x, 3-15, 18,
68, 147
childrearing practices and, 1012, 16, 18-19, 20-22, 30,
31, 39, 52, 103
cross dressing, 3, 4, 6, 18, 147
cultural influences, 73
and family dynamics, 18-19,
26, 30, 37-38, 103
friendships, 8-9
genetic link, 11-13, 22, 82-83,
103-104, 108, 118
green’s study, 17-19, 25-26
normalization of gender role
behavior, 184, 213-214
occupational and recreational
interests, 65, 68-69
prenatal effects of hormones,
53-54
psychological treatment, 15,
20, 22, 23-28, 29, 30-31,
38
sexual orientation, x-xi, 1213, 17, 19-20, 26, 36, 38,
58-59, 61-84, 91, 93, 108,
111, 134, 135-136, 138

shame and defensiveness, 15,
37, 58-59, 103
speech development, 73, 214
stereotypes, 17
stigmatization and
persecution, xi, 7-10, 1415, 17, 30, 31, 32-33, 3536, 38, 80, 183
suicide, 37
and transsexualism, xi, 15, 20,
28, 30, 31-32, 33, 135136, 138, 146, 148, 163,
168, 178, 183, 184
“femmes,” xi, 36, 78, 79, 80, 84,
93, 109
“femiphobia/sissyphobia,” 59, 7778, 80
filipino bayot, 136
finger length ratio, 122, 123
florence, italy, in fifteenth-century,
125, 129
frotteurism, 171
freund, kurt, 95, 157, 158

g
gay men. see also male
homosexuality
accent/speech, xi, 69-73, 7576, 79, 79-80
age preferences in mates, 9698, 131, 132
aids/hiv infection, 84, 162,
183
childhood behavior, x-xi, 12,
13, 17, 19-20, 38, 58-59,
61-62, 68, 80-81



225

index
coming out, 19, 36, 37, 57
drag queens, 72, 76, 135, 136,
155, 159-160, 179-180,
183, 205
earliest sexual experiences, 36,
112, 148
“femmes,” xi, 36, 78, 79, 80,
84, 93, 109
“femiphobia/sissyphobia,” 59,
77-78, 80
flaming, 79
knowledge of sexuality, 35-36
mating psychology and
relationships, 76-81, 87,
90-91, 98, 100-101
monogamy, 85-86, 90, 100-101
movement patterns and
motor behavior, xi, 7376, 79-80
number of sex partners, 86, 100
occupational and recreational
interests, 63-69, 79-80,
105-106
persecution by other gays, 3536
personals ads, 77-79, 84, 8687, 93, 98, 101
prostitutes/prostitution, 134,
135, 136
psychological problems, 8183, 93
research as a threat to, 113115, 158
sex with women, 57, 116
sexual practices and
preferences, 57, 83-84, 86

stereotypes, 63-81
stigmatization/social
intolerance, 37, 81, 100,
114, 115
twins, 106-110
gay marriage, 100
gay rights movement, 100
gender dysphoria, 23, 27
gender identity, xi, 22, 47
defined, 50
gradations in, 50
“look at ‘em funny” theories
of, 52-53
gender identity and psychosexual
disorders clinic, 48
gender identity development
brain differences, 44
cloacal exstrophy and, 42-45,
47, 48-50, 51-52
hormones and, 42, 44, 53-54
nature-nurture debate, 44-47,
52-53
psychosexual neutrality at
birth, theory of, 47-48
socialization and, 39-40, 4144, 52, 65
gender identity disorder
behavioral criteria, 22-23
conservatives’ theories and
therapies, 24-26, 31
controversies, 23-24
defined, 22
liberals’ theories and therapies,
26-28, 29-30, 31
moderates’ theories and
therapies, 28-34



226

the man who would be queen

research design, 34
transsexual outcomes, 28, 3132, 33-34, 167, 178-179,
180
gender identity disorder and
psychosocial problems in
children and adolescents
(zucker), 29, 215
gender role behavior, xi, 45, 184
gender shock (burke), 26, 216
genetic testing for homosexuality,
113-114
genetics
and cross dressing, 170, 172
and femininity in males, 1113, 22, 82-83, 103-104,
108, 118
multiple gene hypothesis, 118
of sexual orientation, 58, 106110, 112-113, 118
twin studies of gays, 106-110
x-linked trait, 112-113
genital arousal, measurement of,
94
greek pederasty, 124, 125, 126,
127, 128, 131
green, richard, 17-19, 25-26, 32,
62, 178, 215
gynandromorphophiles, 186

harvard university, 24
heimel, cynthia, 93
heterosexual outlets, and male
homosexuality, 131-132
hirschfeld, magnus, 171
homosexuality. see also gay men;
male homosexuality
abortion controversy, 114
artistic brother hypothesis,
117-118
children’s knowledge of, 3435, 36
creation myth, 128
genetic testing for, 113-114
inclusive fitness hypothesis,
117
parents’ reaction to, 98-99,
114-115
as perversion or inferior
sexuality, 24, 101
prevalence of, 111-112, 126127
psychological therapy, 29
removal from dsm, 81
as social construction, 124-133
as solution to overpopulation,
117
hooker, evelyn, 81

h

immune response hypothesis, 111
inclusive fitness hypothesis, 117
indian hijras, 134, 138
intercrural intercourse, 127
international academy of sex
research, 158

hamer, dean, 112, 120, 121
harry benjamin international
gender dysphoria
association, 201
harvard sentences, 70

i



227

index
intersexuality, 175
isay, richard, 26, 27

j
japan, 205
johns hopkins university, 47, 48,
206-207
jorgensen, christine, 20, 217

k
kenrick, doug, 98
kleinfelter’s syndrome, 22

l
lawrence, anne, 168, 174-175,
218, 219
leadership u, 24
leno, jay, 123lesbians, 47, 67-68,
99, 100, 122-123, 185,
204, 211
levay, simon, 26, 27, 28, 32, 119121, 217
lippa, richard, 64-65, 66, 123

m
ma vie en rose (film), 215
machiavelli, 129
malaysia, 205
male homosexuality. see also gay
men
in adoptive brothers, 108
brain development and, 7273, 118-122, 169
birth order and, 111, 158
in british public schools, 125,
131, 132

cultural differences in
behavior, 133-138
egalitarian relationships, 134,
137-138
evolutionary paradox, 88,
115-118
family acceptance of, 37
and femininity, x-xi, 12-13,
17, 19-20, 26, 36, 38, 5859, 61-84, 91, 93, 108,
111, 134, 135-136, 138
in fifteenth-century florence,
125, 129
genetic link, 106-110, 112-113
greek pederasty, 124, 125,
126, 127, 128, 131
heterosexual outlets and, 131132
immune response hypothesis,
111
indian hijras, 134, 138
and masculinity, 58, 60, 84,
85-102, 108, 135-136
native american berdache
tradition, 134, 137, 138
oman xanith, 135
in prison, 131
roman cinaedi, 125, 128
in sambia tribe of new
guinea, 125, 130-131,
132
seduction-and-recruitment
hypothesis, 112
self-awareness of, 36-37
shame and conflict about, 26,
27, 31, 33, 36, 59, 108



228

the man who would be queen

tahitian mahu, 134
transsexual, 134, 135, 136,
137, 138, 146, 147-151,
159, 162, 163, 167, 168169, 171, 172, 176, 177191
in twins, 106-111
as x-linked trait, 112-113
marks, mimi, 186
masculine females, xii
masculinity, and male
homosexuality, 58, 60, 84,
85-102, 108, 135-136
masochism, 171, 172
mating psychology and
relationships of gay men,
76-81, 87, 90-91, 98,
100-101
mattison, andrew, 90
mccloskey, deirdre n., 218
mchugh, paul, 206-207
mcwhirter, david, 90
midnight in the garden of good and
evil (movie), 143
money, john, 47-48, 50, 155, 216
monogamy, 85-86, 90, 100-101
mothers, and feminine sons, 3-5,
8-15, 18-19, 20-21, 26,
37, 39, 52
movement patterns and motor
behavior, xi, 73-76, 79-80
mutual masterbation, 131

n
naked civil servant,the (crisp),
84, 216

national association for research
and therapy of
homosexuality
(narth), 24, 216
national institutes of health, 24
native american berdache tradition,
134, 137, 138
nature (journal), 122-123
necrophilia, 171
netherlands, 32, 82, 197, 205
neuroticism, 82-83
northwestern university, 16, 64,
86, 107, 206
norton, rictor, 217

o
oberschneider, michael, 67
occupational and recreational
interests
of feminine males, 65, 68-69
of gay men, 63-69, 79-80,
105-106
of transsexuals, 136, 142, 149,
152-153, 168, 184-185,
210
oman xanith, 135
ontario correctional institute, 157
oral sex, 57, 86, 130, 131, 134,
148, 149, 188

p
paraphilia, 171-172
parenting behavior
and femininity in boys, 10-12,
16, 18-19, 20-22, 30, 31,
39, 52, 103



229

index
study design, 21-22
pederastic relationships, 128
pedophilia, 171
penile ablation, and gender
development, 45-47
penile plethysmograph, 94, 95
persecution and stigmatization
cloacal exstrophy and, 46
cross dressing and, 161
of feminine boys, xi, 7-10, 1415, 17, 30, 31, 32-33, 3536, 38, 80, 183
of gays by other gays, 35-36
of homosexuals by
heterosexuals, 37, 81, 100,
114, 115
of transsexuals, 183
personals ads, 77-79, 84, 86-87, 93,
98, 101
peterson, maxine, 172-173, 202,
203, 204-205, 208
pillard, richard, 106, 110, 121
playgirl magazine, 94
pornography, 93-96
prejudice against “femmes,” xi
prenatal effects of hormones, 5354, 104-105, 119-120,
121, 122
pressland, natasha, 135
priscilla: queen of the desert
(movie), 142
prisons, homosexuality in, 131
prostitutes/prostitution, 134, 135,
136, 151, 183-185, 187188, 211
pseudo-hermaphrodites, 47

psychological problems, of gay
men, 81-83, 93
psychosexual neutrality at birth,
theory of, 47-48
psychotherapy
for cross dressing, 164
for feminine boys, 15, 20, 22,
23-28, 29, 30-31, 38
for homosexuals, 29

r
reimer, david (john/joan case),
45-46, 48, 51, 216
reiner, william, 48, 51-52
rekers, george, 24-25, 27, 28, 31,
216
richardson, justin, 26
rocke, michael, 129
rodman, dennis, 142
roman cinaedi, 125, 128

s
sambia tribe of new guinea, 125,
130-131, 132
science magazine, 120
sedaris, david, 35, 73
seduction-and-recruitment
hypothesis, 112
sex differences
in age preferences in mates,
96-98
in brain development, 72-73,
118-122
in casual sex interests, 86, 8890, 101
finger length ratio, 122, 123



230

the man who would be queen

in height, 65
in interest in children, 99-100
in mating psychology, 76-77,
87-88
in movement and motor
behavior, xi, 73-76
in sexual arousal patterns, 9496
in socialization, 65-66
in speech, 72-73
in visual sexual stimuli, 93-96
sex reassignment surgery
age factors, 46-47
appropriateness for
autogynephiles, 173, 174
breast implants, 198-199
castration, 196
cloacal exstrophy and, 40-44,
47, 49, 51
costs, 149, 197, 198, 199
electrolysis, 196
employers’ tolerance of, 203,
208
facial plastic surgery, 198
in homosexual transsexuals,
159, 182-183, 185, 188191
hormone therapy, 46, 48, 149,
196-197, 201, 202
insurance coverage, 205-206
international differences in
compassion and
assistance, 205-206
labiaplasty, 200
and orgasm, 208
penile ablation and, 45-47

penile construction, 45
postoperative regret, 173, 202,
207-208
procedures, 195-201, 219
quack surgeons, 200-201
realism and sensitivity of neovagina, 195, 200, 208
and sexual relationships, 46,
149, 185, 188-191, 209211
side effects, 31, 197, 199
silicon injections, 199
social transition prior to, 201205
successful outcomes, 207-209
vaginoplasty, 45-46, 189, 199201
voice surgery or therapy, 197198, 219
sexual arousal patterns, 94-96
sexual orientation, xi
of autogynephilic transsexuals,
180, 183, 190-191
biological markers of, 122123
cloacal exstrophy and, 45, 46,
47, 48, 111
and dance, 67-69, 76
environmental factors, 110112
essentialists’ view, 126
of feminine boys, x-xi, 12, 13,
17, 19-20, 38, 58-59, 6163, 84
genetics of, 58, 106-110, 112113, 118



231

index
of homosexual transsexuals,
136, 146, 151, 159, 182183
and interest in parenting, 99100
negative effects of research on
gays, 113-115
parental influence, 4
and physical attractiveness of
partners, 91-93
and physical violence, 91
prenatal effects of androgens,
53-54, 104-105, 119-120,
122
prenatal stress and, 53-54,
104-106
psychological hypothesis, 6566
and rorschack test responses,
81
sexual arousal patterns and,
94-96
and sexual jealousy, 90-91
and sexual promiscuity, 86-87,
101
social constructionists’ view,
124-133
sociological hypothesis, 66
of transsexuals, xi-xii, 136,
148, 152-154, 156, 178,
211
twin studies, 106-110
and visual sexual stimuli, 9396
sexual partners, number of, 86,
100; see also casual sex

sexual sadism, 171, 172
sexually dimorphic nucleus
(rats), 119-120
she-males, 186-188, 190
siblings, and feminine brothers, 5
silence of the lambs (movie), 143
social conservatives’ theories and
therapies, 24-26, 31, 87,
89-90, 100, 111
social constructionism controversy,
124-133, 217
social liberals’ theories and
therapies, 26-28, 29-30,
31
social moderates’ theories and
therapies, 28-34
socialization, and gender
development, 39-40, 4144, 52, 65
society for the second self (triess), 161, 168
standards of care for gender
identity disorders, 201
stereotypes, gay, 63-81
suicide, 37, 83
sullivan, andrew, 100
symons, donald, 90
symposium (plato), 128

t
tahitian mahu, 134
testosterone, 42, 44, 53, 118-120,
122, 201
thailand, 135
tonga, 135
transgendered, 174



232

the man who would be queen

transexual women’s resources,
218, 219
transsexualism, female-to-male,
201, 205, 207
transsexualism, male-to-female
causes, 145, 166-167, 169-170,
171-172, 178, 206, 207
defined, 144
degrees of, 144
and femininity, xi, 15, 20, 28,
30, 31-32, 33, 135-136,
138, 146, 148, 163, 167,
168, 178, 181, 184
gender identity disorder and,
28, 31-32, 33-34, 167,
178-179, 180, 207
genetic links, 183-184
motivation for, xi-xii, 146,
164
movies about, 142-143
as paraphilia, 171-172
prevalence, 20, 142
surgery, see sex reassignment
surgery
talk-show themes, 142-143
therapy, 153, 162-163, 165166
types, 162-166
transsexuals
asexual, 159, 162, 163
autogynephilic, 146, 147, 151156, 163-176, 181, 190191, 192-194, 202, 203204, 206, 207-208, 209,
211, 218
beauty pageants, 135

bisexual, 159, 162
and casual sex, 156, 185, 211
common lies and
deceptiveness of, 172-176
cross-cultural occurence, 171,
183-184
cross dressing, 147, 148, 152153, 155, 159, 163-165,
168, 169, 173, 174-175,
176, 203
depression, 155, 163
disclosure to partners, 190191
discrimination against, 183
distinguishing between types,
192-194
dreams for the future, 186,
210
family relationships, 15, 20,
32, 149-150, 155-156,
183, 203, 204-205, 206,
209, 211
female impersonators, 185,
186-187
filipino bayot, 136
heterosexual, 159, 162
hiv infection, 185
homosexual, 134, 135, 136,
137, 138, 146, 147-151,
159, 162, 163, 167, 168169, 171, 172, 176, 177191, 207, 209-210
marriage and children, 162,
168, 174, 188-191, 201,
203, 204-205, 206, 209,
210, 211



233

index
medical procedures, 149, 196201
occupational preferences, 136,
142, 149, 152-153, 168,
184-185, 210
partner preferences, 136, 146,
151, 159, 182-183
physical attractiveness, 135,
141, 180-183, 188-189,
198
prostitutes/prostitution, 151,
183-185, 187-188, 211
sexual preferences and
practices, xi-xii, 136, 148,
152-154, 156, 178, 211
she-males, 186-188, 190
shoplifting, 184, 185
social transition prior to
surgery, 201-205
socialization between types,
147, 177-178, 211-212
voice/speech patterns, 72,
197-198, 201
transvestites, 155, 160-161, 165,
218

tula, 180
twilight of the golds (play), 113

u
ulrichs, karl, xi
university medical center
(utrecht), 32
university of california at los
angeles, 24
university of south carolina, 24

v
visual sexual stimuli, 94

w
weinrich, james, 84
whitam, fred, 135-136
wilson, e. o., 117
witelson, sandra, 60
wongprasert, thanaporn, 135

z
zucker, ken, 28-34, 62, 170, 178179



